SOURCE_FILE: mti-06-00098.pdf
SOURCE_TYPE: pdf
-----
             Multimodal Technologies
             and Interaction



Article
Effect of Arm Pivot Joints on Stiffness Discrimination in
Haptic Environments
Khandaker Nusaiba Hafiz 1 and Ernur Karadoğan 2, *

                                          1   Bionic Laboratory, Mechanical Engineering, Bourns College of Engineering, University of California,
                                              Riverside, CA 92507, USA
                                          2   Robotics and Haptics Laboratory, School of Engineering and Technology, Central Michigan University,
                                              Mount Pleasant, MI 48858, USA
                                          *   Correspondence: ernur.karadogan@cmich.edu


                                          Abstract: We investigated the effect of arm pivot joints that are typically used during haptic explo-
                                          ration by evaluating four joints of the human arm (metacarpophalangeal joint of the index finger,
                                          wrist, elbow, and shoulder joints). Using a virtual stiffness discrimination task, a four-session psy-
                                          chophysical experiment was conducted with 38 participants (25 male and 13 female); each session was
                                          conducted with one of the four joints as the pivot joint during haptic exploration. The participants
                                          were asked to judge the stiffness of the top surface of two computer-generated cylinders by determin-
                                          ing the stiffer one while using their dominant hand’s index finger. A two-alternative forced-choice
                                          procedure was employed by assigning one cylinder a constant stiffness value of 1.0 N/mm (standard
                                          side) and the remaining cylinder a variable stiffness value (comparison side). Using a custom-made
                                          stylus for the Geomagic TouchTM (3D Systems, Inc., Rock Hill, SC, USA) haptic interface, the par-
                                          ticipants were able to feel the stiffness of these virtual surfaces only with their index fingers. It was
                                          observed that the average Weber fraction monotonically decreased as the pivot joint shifted toward
                                          the torso (i.e., a shift from the metacarpophalangeal joint to the shoulder joint); this decrease was
                                          not statistically significant, which suggests that the selection of the pivot joint was not a determining
Citation: Hafiz, K.N.; Karadoğan, E.
                                          factor for the sensitivity to discriminate stiffness. In general, the palpation speed and force exerted by
Effect of Arm Pivot Joints on Stiffness
                                          the participants on the standard side during the haptic exploration showed a tendency to increase
Discrimination in Haptic
                                          when the pivot joint shifted toward the torso; the difference in average palpation speed and force
Environments. Multimodal Technol.
Interact. 2022, 6, 98. https://doi.org/
                                          across the pivot joints was not statistically significant.
10.3390/mti6110098
                                          Keywords: haptics; virtual environment; simulations; stiffness discrimination; metacarpophalangeal
Academic Editors: Arun
                                          joint; wrist joint; elbow joint; shoulder joint
K. Kulshreshth and Kevin Pfeil

Received: 13 October 2022
Accepted: 4 November 2022
Published: 10 November 2022               1. Introduction
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral            During the design and development stage of a haptic simulation system, designers of
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   such systems must make various decisions and selections that contribute toward creating
published maps and institutional affil-   an engaging and, more importantly, useful simulation. These decisions may include the
iations.                                  choice of the software language and development environment, pedagogical aspects in
                                          line with the learning outcomes, components of the user interface (such as easy access to
                                          relevant parameters of the simulation), and the haptic interface (one with sufficient force
                                          resolution and capacity, for instance). The choice of the haptic device also determines how
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.         users should interact with the simulation such as by using a stylus or a thimble, and how
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        this stylus/thimble can be operated by the user to control the user’s interaction comfortably
This article is an open access article    and accurately with that virtual environment as part of the simulation. While users interact
distributed under the terms and
                                          with a virtual environment using a haptic device, they employ a joint of the arm (e.g., elbow
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                          or wrist joint) as the pivot joint; that is, they use a joint of the arm as the support point
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                          to control the haptic device during haptic exploration. Naturally, this choice is generally
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          affected by both the selected haptic device and the purpose of that simulation. For instance,
4.0/).




Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98. https://doi.org/10.3390/mti6110098                                    https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mti
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                        2 of 14




                                       a simulation that trains osteopathic medical students in palpation may require trainees
                                       to use their entire arm during haptic exploration, and therefore, users may tend to utilize
                                       their shoulder joint as the pivot joint [1]. On the other hand, a simulation that promotes the
                                       usage of a stylus as the proxy for a physical tool (e.g., a simulation for dentistry students)
                                       may require trainees to use their wrist or elbow as the pivot joint [2,3]. In addition to
                                       these simulation-specific requirements, some simulations may provide the users with the
                                       freedom to choose their own pivot joint during haptic exploration; in that kind of scenario,
                                       different users utilize different pivot joints based on individual preferences.
                                             During virtual exploration, if the users are in control of their actions while initiating
                                       the touch, it is defined as active touch; on the other hand, in passive touch, a haptic
                                       interface or external stimulus is used to simulate the touch [4]. This potential variability in
                                       identifying the pivot joint stems from the fact that most tasks involving (active/passive)
                                       touch without restrictions can be performed using any joint of the arm as the pivot joint.
                                       This brings up the question: Could we, as prospective users or the designer of a haptic
                                       simulation, intentionally select that pivot joint beforehand for a better outcome (increased
                                       level of accuracy and speed, higher efficiency, etc.) on a specific task? Better yet, by training
                                       ourselves using a specific joint of our arm as the pivot, could we learn to adopt that same
                                       palpation approach in real life for a better outcome (e.g., for a more accurate palpatory
                                       diagnosis/treatment by a doctor of osteopathy or a veterinarian)? To the best of the authors’
                                       knowledge, there has not been a study to date that directly investigates the effect of the
                                       pivot joint on the task performance of haptic simulation users. Therefore, this study aims
                                       to take the first step toward investigating the effect of the human arm’s pivot joints on the
                                       performance of a haptic-related task. Although there are many aspects of touch that define
                                       the quality of information we receive through the action of touch, we have specifically
                                       chosen the stiffness discrimination task during haptic exploration, as it lends itself to
                                       relatively straightforward implementation in a psychophysical experiment and has a wide
                                       application area including medicine and education. Other alternative tasks such as force
                                       angle and height discrimination are also possible and planned for the future.
                                             Stiffness discrimination has been an active area of research to study the properties of
                                       objects in virtual environments [5,6]. A few examples are given here, as they use similar
                                       concepts that were used in the current study. Genecov et al. [7] analyzed the non-linear
                                       stiffness and geometry of a jamming device using just noticeable difference (JND) as a
                                       parameter for examining human perception. The just noticeable difference is defined as
                                       the minimum stiffness difference between the objects detectable by a user [8]. Fu et al. [9]
                                       discussed the basic principles of just noticeable difference (JND) associated with human
                                       haptics in observing mechanical force feedback properties. The ratio of JND to the standard
                                       stiffness expresses the Weber fraction of any sensory modality, which indicates the sensi-
                                       tivity toward stiffness discrimination ability, i.e., a lower Weber fraction designates better
                                       stiffness discrimination ability [10]. The Weber fraction is a well-established parameter to
                                       analyze psychophysical responses to human perception of stiffness [11]. Maereg et al. [12]
                                       developed a wearable vibrotactile haptic device to use for stiffness discrimination in virtual
                                       interactions and used Weber fractions for quantitative analysis. They used the wearable
                                       haptic device at the wrist joint for this experiment and found that the average Weber frac-
                                       tion values for ten participants were 0.39 for visual feedback only 0.24 for tactile feedback
                                       only and 0.25 for both feedbacks combined. De Gersem [13] utilized a PHANToM 1.5 haptic
                                       device and estimated the elbow joint’s Weber fractions were between 0.08 and 0.12 for
                                       their experiment. Son and Park [14] developed a wearable haptic system for hand palms
                                       and fingers to improve the tactile perception of bulky objects. They calculated the Weber
                                       fraction for their wearable haptic interface for the palm and finger separately and together
                                       at a range of 0.3 to 0.6 approximately. Karadogan et al. [15] analyzed the Weber fraction for
                                       four different standard stiffness values (0.25, 0.50, 1.00, and 1.25 N/mm). They used the
                                       metacarpophalangeal joint as a pivot point to explore two virtual cylinders with stiffness
                                       differences. The Weber fraction for four standard stiffness was 0.2, 0.27, 0.26, and 0.3,
                                       respectively.
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                3 of 14



 Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                                                 3 of 14
                                       cylinders with stiffness differences. The Weber fraction for four standard stiffness was 0.2,
                                       0.27, 0.26, and 0.3, respectively.
                                             In the current study, we examined the effect of different pivot joints of a human up-
                                              In the
                                       per limb       current
                                                  through     study, we examined
                                                            comparative            the
                                                                         analysis at    effect of different
                                                                                      a stiffness           pivot joints
                                                                                                  discrimination   task. of  a human
                                                                                                                          Four         upper
                                                                                                                                pivot joints
                                       of the arm (metacarpophalangeal joint of the index finger, wrist joint, elbow joint, joints
                                        limb   through    comparative  analysis at  a  stiffness discrimination    task.  Four   pivot   and
                                        of the arm
                                       shoulder       (metacarpophalangeal
                                                   joint)                     joint of
                                                          were evaluated by means     ofthe  index finger, wrist
                                                                                          a psychophysical          joint, elbow
                                                                                                              experiment           joint, the
                                                                                                                             to analyze   and
                                        shoulder joint) were evaluated by means of a psychophysical experiment to analyze the
                                       Weber fractions, average palpation speed, and average palpation force during a stiffness
                                        Weber fractions, average palpation speed, and average palpation force during a stiffness
                                       discrimination task. The following sections of the paper detail the methodology and re-
                                        discrimination task. The following sections of the paper detail the methodology and results
                                       sults of the experiment, and the discussion of these results.
                                        of the experiment, and the discussion of these results.
                                       2.2.Methodology
                                            Methodology
                                       2.1.
                                        2.1.Experimental
                                             ExperimentalSetupSetup
                                             As
                                              Asshown
                                                  shown in in Figure 1,  1, the
                                                                             theexperimental
                                                                                  experimentalsetup   setupwas was   composed
                                                                                                                  composed          of three
                                                                                                                                of three   main main    compo-
                                                                                                                                                   components:
                                       nents:  a  computer      software      module      (i.e.,  the  virtual   environment),
                                        a computer software module (i.e., the virtual environment), a haptic device (Geomagic         a  haptic    device   (Ge-
                                       omagic  TMTouch   TM by 3D Systems) to establish the interface between the participant and the
                                        Touch by 3D Systems) to establish the interface between the participant and the computer
                                       computer
                                        software,software,
                                                    and an arm    andrestraint
                                                                        an arm table
                                                                                   restraint     tablethe
                                                                                           to place      to place   the participant’s
                                                                                                             participant’s                 arm. In
                                                                                                                              arm. In Figure        1, Figure
                                                                                                                                                       the arm’s 1,
                                       the  arm’s in
                                        position   position    in four different
                                                       four different      sessions sessions
                                                                                        is shown.   is While
                                                                                                        shown.using
                                                                                                                  While  theusing   the metacarpophalan-
                                                                                                                              metacarpophalangeal            joint
                                       geal  joint1a)
                                        (Figure    (Figure
                                                        of the1a)  of the
                                                                 index        index
                                                                          finger    asfinger
                                                                                        the pivotas he     pivot
                                                                                                       joint,  thejoint,   the participants
                                                                                                                     participants                 placed
                                                                                                                                       placed their        their
                                                                                                                                                         forearm
                                       forearm
                                        on an arm on an   arm
                                                        pad    padtheir
                                                             and      and hand
                                                                             their hand
                                                                                     againstagainst
                                                                                                 a handa hand
                                                                                                            rest rest
                                                                                                                  whilewhile   moving
                                                                                                                           moving      thethe   finger-holder
                                                                                                                                            finger-holder        on
                                       on
                                        thethe  haptic
                                             haptic      interfacewith
                                                       interface      withtheirtheirindex
                                                                                      indexfinger
                                                                                               fingerofofthe the dominant
                                                                                                                 dominant hand. hand. For For the
                                                                                                                                                thewrist
                                                                                                                                                     wristjoint
                                                                                                                                                             joint
                                        (Figure1b),
                                       (Figure    1b),the
                                                        theparticipants
                                                            participantscould   couldmove
                                                                                        movetheir theirhands
                                                                                                          handsfrom
                                                                                                                  fromthe thewrist
                                                                                                                              wristjoint
                                                                                                                                       jointasasthe
                                                                                                                                                  thehand
                                                                                                                                                       handrestrest
                                        wasfolded
                                       was    foldeddown,
                                                        down,and andany anymovement
                                                                               movementofofthe     theelbow
                                                                                                        elbowwas wasrestricted
                                                                                                                       restrictedby   bymeans
                                                                                                                                           meansofofpadding
                                                                                                                                                        padding
                                        underthe
                                       under     theforearm.
                                                      forearm.InInthe  thesession
                                                                             sessionwithwiththe theelbow
                                                                                                     elbowjointjointasasthe
                                                                                                                          thepivot
                                                                                                                               pivotjoint
                                                                                                                                        joint(Figure
                                                                                                                                              (Figure1c), 1c),the
                                                                                                                                                                the
                                        participantsused
                                       participants      usedtheir
                                                               theirelbow
                                                                       elbowtotoreceive
                                                                                     receivesupport
                                                                                                supportfrom fromthethearm
                                                                                                                        armpad—the
                                                                                                                              pad—theelbow, elbow,wrist,
                                                                                                                                                      wrist,and
                                                                                                                                                              and
                                        metacarpophalangealjoint
                                       metacarpophalangeal           joint moved
                                                                             moved freely. When   When the the participants
                                                                                                                participantsused usedthe  theshoulder
                                                                                                                                               shoulderjointjointas
                                        the  pivot  joint  (Figure    1d),    they   did  not
                                       as the pivot joint (Figure 1d), they did not receive      receive   any   support     at all  from   the   arm
                                                                                                                                all from the arm pad andpad   and
                                        could   use  the  haptic   interface     by   using   their   shoulder
                                       could use the haptic interface by using their shoulder as the pivot joint.  as the   pivot  joint.




                                                                    (a)                                                          (b)




                                                                    (c)                                                          (d)
                                       Figure
                                        Figure1.1.User
                                                    Userinterface
                                                         interfacefor
                                                                    forthe
                                                                         thestiffness
                                                                             stiffnessdiscrimination
                                                                                       discriminationtask:
                                                                                                         task:(a)(a)metacarpophalangeal
                                                                                                                     metacarpophalangealjoint  jointasasthe
                                                                                                                                                          the
                                       pivot
                                        pivotjoint;
                                              joint;(b)
                                                     (b)wrist
                                                         wristjoint
                                                               jointasasthe
                                                                         thepivot
                                                                             pivotjoint;
                                                                                   joint;(c)
                                                                                          (c)elbow
                                                                                              elbowjoint
                                                                                                     jointasasthe
                                                                                                               thepivot
                                                                                                                    pivotjoint;
                                                                                                                           joint;(d)
                                                                                                                                  (d)shoulder
                                                                                                                                      shoulderjoint
                                                                                                                                                jointasasthe
                                                                                                                                                          the
                                       pivot
                                        pivotjoint.
                                              joint.

                                       2.2.
                                        2.2.Software
                                             Softwareand
                                                      andVirtual
                                                          VirtualEnvironment
                                                                  Environment
                                            For
                                             Forthis
                                                 thisexperiment,
                                                       experiment,wewe created a virtual
                                                                          created        simulation
                                                                                  a virtual         of two
                                                                                            simulation   of computer-generated   cyl-
                                                                                                            two computer-generated
                                        cylinders with  different stiffness values. The  participants used  this simulation to explore
                                       inders with different stiffness values. The participants used this simulation to explore the
                                        the upper surfaces of those cylinders. Microsoft Visual C++ and the OpenGL graphics
                                        library were used to generate the graphical interface that is compatible with any desktop
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                              4 of 14



      Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                                  4 of 14
                                         upper surfaces of those cylinders. Microsoft Visual C++ and the OpenGL graphics library
                                         were used to generate the graphical interface that is compatible with any desktop or lap-
                                         top computer [15]. OpenHapticsTM Toolkit                  was used as an interface between the software
                                            or laptop computer [15]. OpenHapticsTM Toolkit was used as an interface between the
                                         and  the user.
                                            software     andWe  theused
                                                                    user. an
                                                                           WeIntel(R)
                                                                               used anCore      (TM)
                                                                                          Intel(R)   Corei7-6700
                                                                                                            (TM) computer       with awith
                                                                                                                   i7-6700 computer       64-bit   Operation
                                                                                                                                                a 64-bit
                                         system,   Windows          10  Education    edition,   16.0    GB   RAM,     and  an
                                            Operation system, Windows 10 Education edition, 16.0 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA Quadro  NVIDIA       Quadro      M2000
                                         video  adapter.
                                            M2000              The userThe
                                                    video adapter.         interface   is shown
                                                                              user interface        in Figure
                                                                                              is shown           2, which
                                                                                                           in Figure        contains
                                                                                                                       2, which containstwotwo virtual
                                                                                                                                                  virtualthree-
                                         dimensional       cylinders
                                            three-dimensional            (numbered
                                                                     cylinders (numbered1 and  3), response
                                                                                             1 and   3), responsefeedback
                                                                                                                    feedbackofofthe
                                                                                                                                 the last  trial,device
                                                                                                                                      last trial,  device sta-
                                         tus, and a timer to display the remaining trial time. This simulation also allowsuser
                                            status, and    a  timer  to display  the remaining    trial time.  This  simulation  also  allows   the   the user
                                            to pause
                                         to pause   it itatatany
                                                               anytime
                                                                   timeusing
                                                                          using the
                                                                                the “P”
                                                                                     “P”keykeyfrom
                                                                                                from thethekeyboard.
                                                                                                             keyboard.




                                         Figure 2. User interface for the stiffness discrimination task.
                                            Figure 2. User interface for the stiffness discrimination task.

                                         2.3.2.3. Haptic
                                              Haptic     Interfaceand
                                                      Interface    andHardware
                                                                      Hardware
                                                   GeomagicTouch      TM
                                                                TouchTM (3D (3D Systems,
                                                                                 Systems, Inc.)
                                               Geomagic                                        Inc.)was
                                                                                                      wasused
                                                                                                            usedas as
                                                                                                                   thethe
                                                                                                                        haptic interface.
                                                                                                                           haptic          This This
                                                                                                                                    interface.   device
                                                                                                                                                      device
                                            was modified to use with the index finger through a custom-made stylus. The device
                                         was modified to use with the index finger through a custom-made stylus. The device has
                                            has three degrees of freedom, and at the three axes, the stiffness limits are 1.26 N/mm,
                                         three degrees of freedom, and at the three axes, the stiffness limits are 1.26 N/mm, 2.31
                                            2.31 N/mm, and 1.02 N/mm, respectively. According to the device specifications, the
                                         N/mm,
                                            maximum and exertable
                                                          1.02 N/mm,  forcerespectively.
                                                                             is 3.3 N at anyAccording         to the device specifications, the maxi-
                                                                                                nominal position.
                                         mum exertable        force  is  3.3  N  at any   nominal      position.
                                                   The custom-made stylus was designed aiming to quadruple the haptic device’s maxi-
                                            mumTheexertable
                                                      custom-made        stylus
                                                                force. The        wasdevice
                                                                              haptic    designedwith aiming    to quadruple
                                                                                                        modified   finger stylusthe
                                                                                                                                  andhaptic   device’s
                                                                                                                                        a shifted pivot max-
                                                                                                                            TM haptic interface shifts
                                         imum
                                            pointexertable
                                                    is shown inforce.  The
                                                                  Figure   3. haptic
                                                                              The pivotdevice
                                                                                          pointwith
                                                                                                  of theaGeomagic
                                                                                                           modifiedTouch
                                                                                                                       finger  stylus and a shifted pivot
                                            from
                                         point   is point
                                                    shown  “O”
                                                             in to  point3.“A”
                                                                 Figure       Thetopivot
                                                                                    increasepointtheofexertable  force onTouch
                                                                                                       the Geomagic        “O” (FTM    ) by four
                                                                                                                                    haptic
                                                                                                                                  omni            timesshifts
                                                                                                                                             interface
                                            when
                                         from        the “O”
                                                 point   user is
                                                               toapplying
                                                                   point “A”  force
                                                                                  to (F user ) on the
                                                                                      increase     thefinger  stylusforce
                                                                                                        exertable     [16]. on
                                                                                                                            The“O”
                                                                                                                                 modified
                                                                                                                                      (Fomni)stylus cantimes
                                                                                                                                              by four
                                            rotate about point A and move in a horizontal direction (in and out of the page) through
                                         when the user is applying force (Fuser) on the finger stylus [16]. The modified stylus can
                                            the linear guide rail. To ensure that the participants can control the stylus comfortably
                                         rotate about point A and move in a horizontal direction (in and out of the page) through
                                            during the experimentation, their index finger is comfortably wrapped using an adjustable
                                         thestrap
                                              linearoundguide
                                                            therail.   Toholder.
                                                                  finger   ensure that the participants can control the stylus comfortably
                                         during Athe     experimentation,
                                                      custom-made      portabletheir    index finger
                                                                                  ambidextrous            is comfortably
                                                                                                    arm restraint            wrapped
                                                                                                                    setup (Figure  4) wasusing   an adjusta-
                                                                                                                                           constructed
                                         bletostrap   around
                                                install         the finger
                                                        the modified    stylusholder.
                                                                                of the Geomagic TouchTM haptic device. The setup included a
                                             padded surface and a folding palm rest that allowed the isolation of the arm’s pivot joints.
                                             It had the ability to support the arm’s movement at the index finger, wrist, and elbow joints.
Multimodal
 MultimodalTechnol.
            Technol. Interact. 2022,
                               2022,6,6,98
                                         x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                              5 of 14
                                                                                                                                                   5 of 14




                                Figure 3. Geomagic TouchTM haptic device with modified stylus. The modified stylus can rotate
                                about the link at point A and slide on the linear guide rail sideways (in and out of the page as
                                shown). The finger holder with a strap allows palpation with only one finger. Point O is the origi-
                                nal pivot (the distal end of the second arm) of the haptic device and D = 28 mm)

                                     A custom-made portable ambidextrous arm restraint setup (Figure 4) was con-
                                structed    to Geomagic
                                                 install theTouch
                                                                modified        stylus    ofwith
                                                                                              the modified
                                                                                                   Geomagic       Touch   TM haptic device. The setup
                                   Figure3.3. Geomagic
                                   Figure                     TouchTM TM haptic     devicewith
                                                                          haptic device                        stylus.The
                                                                                                  modified stylus.     Themodified
                                                                                                                            modifiedstylus
                                                                                                                                        styluscancanrotate
                                                                                                                                                       rotate
                                included
                                   aboutthe
                                   about     a link
                                           the  padded       surface
                                                          point
                                                 linkatatpoint AAandand and   ona the
                                                                           slide
                                                                       slide       folding
                                                                                  on  the     palm
                                                                                           linear
                                                                                      linear  guide  rest
                                                                                                  guide
                                                                                                    rail    that
                                                                                                          rail    allowed
                                                                                                               sideways
                                                                                                         sideways              the
                                                                                                                               and
                                                                                                                          (inout
                                                                                                                    (in and      of isolation
                                                                                                                                    out  of the
                                                                                                                                    the page      of
                                                                                                                                               aspage the
                                                                                                                                                   shown).asarm’s
                                pivot
                                   The joints.
                                       fingerThe
                                   shown).         Itfinger
                                                      had
                                                 holder      the
                                                          with    ability
                                                               older
                                                               a strapwith
                                                                        allowsto  support
                                                                              a strap   allows
                                                                                 palpation     the
                                                                                                palpation
                                                                                              with           movement
                                                                                                    arm’sewith
                                                                                                   only            only
                                                                                                              finger.    oneOat
                                                                                                                      Point    isthe
                                                                                                                              finger. index     finger,
                                                                                                                                       Point Opivot
                                                                                                                                  the original    is the    wrist,
                                                                                                                                                           origi-
                                                                                                                                                        (the
                                anddistal
                                     elbow
                                   nal pivot    joints.
                                                (the  distal  end  of  the  second    arm)   of the haptic
                                          end of the second arm) of the haptic device and D = 28 mm).        device   and D   = 28  mm)

                                         A custom-made portable ambidextrous arm restraint setup (Figure 4) was con-
                                    structed to install the modified stylus of the Geomagic TouchTM haptic device. The setup
                                    included a padded surface and a folding palm rest that allowed the isolation of the arm’s
                                    pivot joints. It had the ability to support the arm’s movement at the index finger, wrist,
                                    and elbow joints.




                                Figure 4. Custom-made portable arm restraint table setup.
                                    Figure 4. Custom-made portable arm restraint table setup.

                                2.4.2.4. Participants
                                     Participants
                                      In In  total,
                                         total,  40 40   participants
                                                     participants    (15(15  female
                                                                          female     and
                                                                                   and   2525  male)
                                                                                             male)     between1818and
                                                                                                     between          and3030years
                                                                                                                               yearsofofage
                                                                                                                                          age(mean
                                   (mean ± standard deviation = 21.7 ± 3.4) were recruited for this study. As prior technical
                                ± standard deviation = 21.7 ± 3.4) were cruited for this study. As prior technical
                                   knowledge      was not necessary,
                                    Figure 4. Custom-made       portable any
                                                                          arm interested    candidate
                                                                               restraint table  setup. without known neuromuscular
                                knowledge was not necessary, any interested candidate without known neuromuscular
                                   abnormalities, injuries (fractures, etc.), and/or orthopedic procedures of the dominant
                                abnormalities,
                                   hand             injuries (fractures,
                                           could participate.    This studyetc.),    and/or orthopedic
                                                                               was conducted                   procedures
                                                                                                   with approval    from the of    the dominant
                                                                                                                                Institutional
                                    2.4. Participants
                                hand   could
                                   Review       participate.
                                              Board             This
                                                      (IRB) at our     study was
                                                                    institution.      conducted with
                                                                                   Each                    approval     fromformsthe Institutional
                                          In total,  40  participants  (15 female    andparticipant    signed
                                                                                          25 male) between     two consent
                                                                                                                 18 and 30 years    of before
                                                                                                                                       age (mean
                                Review     Board (IRB)
                                   participation:           at our institution.
                                                     one informed    consent formEachabout participant    signed
                                                                                             this experiment    andtwo   consent
                                                                                                                     another         forms
                                                                                                                               consent  formbefore
                                    ± standard deviation = 21.7 ± 3.4) were recruited for this study. As prior technical
                                participation:
                                   for COVID-19   one    informed consent
                                                     precautionary             form
                                                                      awareness.    Outabout
                                                                                         of thethis experimentrecruited,
                                                                                                 40 participants    and another     consent form
                                                                                                                              2 participants’
                                    knowledge was not necessary, any interested candidate without known neuromuscular
                                fordata  were removed
                                     COVID-19               after we detected
                                                    precautionary                them Out
                                                                        awareness.      as outliers
                                                                                              of theusing  the three-sigma
                                                                                                      40 participants          test based2 on
                                                                                                                           recruited,      partici-
                                    abnormalities,
                                   the  Weber           injuries
                                                fractions         (fractures,
                                                            calculated   across etc.),
                                                                                all    and/orTherefore,
                                                                                    sessions.    orthopedic theprocedures
                                                                                                                data  from  38 ofparticipants
                                                                                                                                   the dominant
                                pants’
                                    hand
                                         data   were
                                            could
                                                        removed
                                                    participate.
                                                                    after   we  detected
                                                                   Thisconsidered
                                                                                             them
                                                                          study wasforconducted
                                                                                                    as  outliers   using  the    three-sigma
                                                                                                      with approval from the Institutional
                                                                                                                                               test
                                   (25 male    and  13  female)  were                    the  analyses.
                                based on the Weber fractions calculated across all sessions. Therefore, the data from 38
                                   Review Board (IRB) at our institution. Each participant signed two consent forms before
                                participants (25 male
                                   participation:      and 13 female)
                                                  one informed consentwere
                                                                       form considered  for the analyses.
                                                                            about this experiment and another consent form
                                   for COVID-19 precautionary awareness. Out of the 40 participants recruited, 2 partici-
                                   pants’ data were removed after we detected them as outliers using the three-sigma test
                                   based on the Weber fractions calculated across all sessions. Therefore, the data from 38
                                   participants (25 male and 13 female) were considered for the analyses.
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                                                   6 of 14




                                                              2.5. Experimental Procedure
                                              We tested the effect of four separate pivot joints (the metacarpophalangeal joint of the
                                        dominant index finger, wrist, elbow, and shoulder joints) on the stiffness discrimination
                                        thresholds. For instance, the elbow joint as the pivot meant that the participant placed
                                        his/her elbow on a padded surface for supporting the movement of the joints that are
                                        distal to the elbow. In a similar manner, for the shoulder pivot joint, the arm was allowed
                                        to move freely without placing it on any surface at any portion of the arm while keeping
                                        the torso stationary. We focused on only the proprioceptive feedback from the joints that
                                        are actively utilized during haptic exploration while judging the relative stiffness of the
                                        two virtual surfaces. Therefore, by controlling the pivot joint during the haptic exploration,
                                        we aimed to find out any patterns in individuals’ sensitivity to discriminate stiffness when
                                        the actively utilized joints were varied.
                                              The experimentation was completed in four sessions with each session taking about
                                        30 min. The participants were allowed to perform only one session per day. The joint order
                                        in the four sessions for each participant was randomized. The participants explored the
                                        computer simulation of two virtual cylinders. The upper surfaces of these two cylinders
                                        were designated with different stiffness values. The participants were requested to identify
                                        the stiffer surface in between the two surfaces based on a two-alternative, forced-choice
                                        procedure. They were given a 15 s time limit per trial to feel the stiffness of the simulated
                                        cylinders. The participants were asked to record their response to the stiffer side by selecting
                                        either “1” or “3” from the keyboard. A staircase procedure [16] was used to decide when
                                        to update the stiffness difference between the two surfaces; four incorrect answers in a
                                        row or not obtaining three correct answers in a row in ten consecutive trials resulted in an
                                        increase (the difference was too small to be detected by the participant), and three correct
                                        answers in a row resulted in a decrease in the stiffness difference (the stiffness difference
                                        was detectable by the participant beyond random chance). Figure 5 presents a sample of
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, xthe
                                         FORdata
                                              PEERtoREVIEW
                                                     demonstrate this approach. If the participant did not record any response within
                                                                                                                                  7 of 14
                                        15 s, the response for that trial was considered as a wrong response.


                                                                       Stiffness of comparison side in one session

                                                   0.95
                Comparison side stiffness (N/mm)




                                                                                                                          3                        5
                                                    0.9
                                                   0.85
                                                                                            1                                                          6
                                                    0.8                                                                                 4
                                                   0.75
                                                    0.7                                          2
                                                   0.65
                                                    0.6
                                                   0.55
                                                    0.5
                                                          1   5    9    13   17   21   25   29       33   37   41   45   49   53   57   61   65   69   73

                                                                                                      Trial number

                                                              Figure 5. Actual sample participant data (reversals are numbered).
                                                              Figure 5. Actual sample participant data (reversals are numbered).

                                                              2.6. Data
                                                                   OneCollection  and cylinders
                                                                        of these two  Analysis had a stiffness value of 1.00 N/mm (standard side), and
                                                                    The data
                                                              the other       collected
                                                                         side had         for each
                                                                                   a stiffness valuesession were
                                                                                                      ranging fromcomposed
                                                                                                                   0.5 to 0.99of three (comparison
                                                                                                                               N/mm    parts: the comparison
                                                                                                                                                     side) [17].
                                                              side’s stiffness value for all trials, palpation speed, and palpation force. We used the We-
                                                              ber fraction, which is widely used to evaluate human perception using psychophysical
                                                              responses, in order to determine the sensitivity of the participants to stiffness difference.
                                                              The Weber fraction for each joint of a specific participant was computed from the ratio of
                                                              just a noticeable stiffness difference to the standard stiffness value [18] using the following
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                       7 of 14




                                       The standard stiffness side was randomly assigned to the left or right cylinder for each trial.
                                       The comparison side had eleven levels of stiffness changing between 0.50 and 0.95 N/mm
                                       with 0.05 N/mm increments and 0.99 N/mm, which also prescribed the step size when the
                                       stiffness difference needed to be adjusted.
                                             Each session was composed of several trials, and the total trial numbers in a session
                                       depended on each participant’s capability to identify the stiffer side correctly throughout
                                       the experiment. The sessions ended after six reversals. A reversal is defined as the change
                                       in the opposite direction, such as the stiffness level decreasing after an increase or vice
                                       versa. Figure 5 displays the change in the stiffness of the comparison side (the standard
                                       side is always at 1.00 N/mm) and the use of reversals on actual participant data.

                                       2.6. Data Collection and Analysis
                                            The data collected for each session were composed of three parts: the comparison
                                       side’s stiffness value for all trials, palpation speed, and palpation force. We used the We-
                                       ber fraction, which is widely used to evaluate human perception using psychophysical
                                       responses, in order to determine the sensitivity of the participants to stiffness difference.
                                       The Weber fraction for each joint of a specific participant was computed from the ra-
                                       tio of just a noticeable stiffness difference to the standard stiffness value [18] using the
                                       following equation:

                                                                                           JND
                                                               Weber fraction =
                                                                                   Standard stiffness value
                                       where the just noticeable difference (JND) is defined as the smallest detectable stiffness
                                       difference between the two cylinders. A lower Weber fraction implies better stiffness
                                       discrimination ability. Since the stiffness value of the comparison side changed throughout
                                       a session, we used the average of the last three reversals as the stiffness value of the
                                       comparison side.
                                             The palpation force and velocity vectors at each session were recorded directly from the
                                       OpenHaptics Toolkit and Geomagic TouchTM haptic device through predefined functions.
                                       We collected the data for each trial, while the cursor touched the virtual cylinders’ upper
                                       surface. From the dataset, we extracted the magnitudes of palpation velocity (palpation
                                       speed) and palpation force vectors at four pivot joints. The palpation speed and palpation
                                       forces of the standard side only were taken into consideration because this side maintained
                                       the fixed stiffness value of 1.0 N/mm across all sessions. Palpation forces were calculated
                                       utilizing Hooke’s law. The average value of palpation speed and force values for all trials
                                       in each session were computed and considered in the data analyses.
                                             Out of the 40 participants recruited, 2 participants’ data were removed after we
                                       detected them as outliers using the three-sigma test based on the Weber fractions calculated
                                       across all sessions. Therefore, the data from 38 participants (25 male and 13 female) were
                                       considered for the analyses. The age range of the remaining participants was 18 to 30 years
                                       with a mean age of 21.7 years and a standard deviation of 3.4 years. Upon normality
                                       check, a repeated-measure ANOVA was used to examine the statistical significance of the
                                       Weber fraction values, average palpation forces, and speed across the four pivot joints.
                                       Bonferroni’s confidence interval adjustment was used for post hoc analysis. The correlation
                                       between the average palpation speed with respect to the Weber fraction was analyzed using
                                       the Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient.

                                       3. Results
                                            We analyzed the average Weber fraction, palpation speed, and palpation force by
                                       evaluating the effect of four pivot joints on stiffness discrimination. The results are cate-
                                       gorized in the following subsections based on the Weber fraction, palpation speed, and
                                       palpation force.
                                  using the Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient.

                                  3. Results
                                               We analyzed the average Weber fraction, palpation speed, and palpation force by
                                          evaluating the effect of four pivot joints on stiffness discrimination. The results are cate-
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                       8 of 14
                                          gorized in the following subsections based on the Weber fraction, palpation speed, and
                                          palpation force.

                                 3.1.
                                   3.1.Weber
                                        WeberFraction
                                               Fraction
                                        The
                                         Theaverage
                                              averageWeber
                                                        Weberfraction
                                                                  fractionvalues
                                                                             valueswhen
                                                                                     whenthethemetacarpophalangeal
                                                                                                 metacarpophalangealjoint     jointofofthe
                                                                                                                                        theindex
                                                                                                                                            index
                                 finger,
                                   finger,wrist
                                            wristjoint,
                                                   joint,elbow
                                                           elbowjoint,
                                                                    joint,and
                                                                           andshoulder
                                                                                 shoulderjoint
                                                                                            jointwas
                                                                                                   wasused
                                                                                                         usedas asthe
                                                                                                                    thepivot
                                                                                                                         pivotjoint
                                                                                                                                 jointand
                                                                                                                                        andtheir
                                                                                                                                             their
                                 corresponding
                                   correspondingstandard
                                                      standarderrors
                                                                   errorswere      0.1423±±0.017,
                                                                            were0.1423                 0.1279±±0.014,
                                                                                              0.017,0.1279                0.1276±±0.013,
                                                                                                                  0.014,0.1276         0.013,and
                                                                                                                                              and
                                 0.1150   ±  0.012,  respectively.   As  shown    in Figure  6, the  Weber   fractions   decreased
                                   0.1150 ± 0.012, respectively. As shown in Figure 6, the Weber fractions decreased mono-             monoton-
                                 ically  as the
                                   tonically  aspivot   joint joint
                                                  the pivot    moved     from from
                                                                      moved     the metacarpophalangeal
                                                                                       the metacarpophalangeal   joint to  the to
                                                                                                                        joint   shoulder    joint.
                                                                                                                                   the shoulder
                                 The   average   Weber    fractions   for the  wrist  and  elbow    joints were    very  close
                                   joint. The average Weber fractions for the wrist and elbow joints were very close to one     to one   another.
                                 The   change
                                   another.     in change
                                              The   Weber fractions
                                                              in Weberacross     the four
                                                                           fractions       pivot
                                                                                      across   the joints  was not
                                                                                                    four pivot       statistically
                                                                                                                  joints  was not significant
                                                                                                                                     statistically
                                 (psignificant
                                     > 0.05 for (p
                                                 all>joints).
                                                      0.05 forThe     weber The
                                                                 all joints). fraction
                                                                                    webervalues   across
                                                                                            fraction       different
                                                                                                        values  acrossjoints   werejoints
                                                                                                                         different     analyzed
                                                                                                                                             were
                                 for  male   and   female    participants    separately.   This   analysis   did   not  reveal
                                   analyzed for male and female participants separately. This analysis did not reveal any        any   apparent
                                 pattern
                                   apparentfor pattern
                                               the jointsforand
                                                              thewas    notand
                                                                   joints   statistically
                                                                                was not significant
                                                                                          statisticallyacross   the joints
                                                                                                          significant        (p >the
                                                                                                                         across    0.05), which
                                                                                                                                       joints (p >
                                 suggests    that   the gender     of  the  participants   had   no   effect on   their  performance
                                   0.05), which suggests that the gender of the participants had no effect on their perfor-                in the
                                 haptic
                                   manceexploration.
                                           in the haptic exploration.


                                                              0.15
                                                                                      0.1423
                                        Avg. Weber fraction




                                                              0.14

                                                                                                    0.1279         0.1276
                                                              0.13

                                                              0.12                                                               0.115

                                                              0.11

                                                               0.1
                                                                     0            1             2              3             4
                                                                         1. Metacarpophalangeal joint of index finger, 2. Wrist joint,
                                                                                     3. Elbow joint, 4. Shoulder joint.

                                  Figure6.6.Average
                                 Figure      AverageWeber
                                                     Weberfractions
                                                            fractions(mean
                                                                      (mean±±standard
                                                                              standarderror)
                                                                                       error)of
                                                                                              offour
                                                                                                 fourpivot
                                                                                                      pivotjoints.
                                                                                                            joints.

                                 3.2.
                                   3.2.Palpation
                                        PalpationSpeed
                                                    Speed
                                        The
                                         The averagepalpation
                                             average    palpationspeed speedvalues
                                                                              valuesofofthe theparticipants
                                                                                                 participantsfor forthe
                                                                                                                     thestandard
                                                                                                                          standardstiffness
                                                                                                                                     stiffnessside
                                                                                                                                                 side
                                 are  shown     in Figure
                                   are shown in Figure 7.   7.   The   average     palpation    speed   for the   metacarpophalangeal
                                                                      average palpation speed for the metacarpophalangeal joint               jointof
                                 ofthe
                                     the  index
                                       index      finger,
                                               finger,     wrist
                                                       wrist       joint,
                                                               joint,      elbow
                                                                       elbow        joint,
                                                                               joint, and and     shoulder
                                                                                             shoulder   joint joint  and corresponding
                                                                                                              and their    their corresponding
                                                                                                                                             stand-
                                 standard
                                   ard errorserrors
                                                 werewere   18.1375
                                                       18.1375         ± 1.276
                                                                  ± 1.276    mm/s,mm/s,    19.5747
                                                                                      19.5747        ± 1.604
                                                                                                 ± 1.604  mm/s,mm/s,    17.0552
                                                                                                                    17.0552        ± 1.359
                                                                                                                               ± 1.359 mm/s,mm/s,and
                                 and   20.0833
                                   20.0833       ± 1.466
                                            ± 1.466   mm/s,mm/s,      respectively.
                                                                respectively.     The The     average
                                                                                        average         palpation
                                                                                                   palpation    speedspeed    for elbow
                                                                                                                        for the   the elbow
                                                                                                                                          jointjoint
                                                                                                                                                 was
                                 was   the lowest,
                                   the lowest,   whilewhile    the shoulder
                                                        the shoulder              jointthe
                                                                          joint had      had   the highest
                                                                                            highest   value. value.    The repeated-measure
                                                                                                              The repeated-measure         analysis
                                 analysis   of  variance   across   the  four  joints  indicated    that there
                                   of variance across the four joints indicated that there was no significant    was  no   significant  difference
                                                                                                                                 difference   in the
                                 inpalpation
                                     the palpation
                                                speedspeed   between
                                                       between            the joints
                                                                    the joints        (p > 0.05).
                                                                                 (p > 0.05).        We also
                                                                                               We also       did observe
                                                                                                         did not   not observeany any  significant
                                                                                                                                   significant   cor-
                                 correlation    between
                                   relation between        theaverage
                                                         the     averageWeber
                                                                            Weberfractions
                                                                                     fractionsand and the
                                                                                                       the average
                                                                                                           average palpation
                                                                                                                       palpation speeds
                                                                                                                                    speeds of ofthe
                                                                                                                                                  the
                                 standard
                                   standardstiffness
                                              stiffnessside
                                                         sideforforany
                                                                     anyofofthe
                                                                             thefour
                                                                                   fourjoints.
                                                                                         joints.There
                                                                                                 Therewaswasalso
                                                                                                               alsononoapparent
                                                                                                                         apparentpattern
                                                                                                                                     patternininthe
                                                                                                                                                  the
                                 average
                                   averagepalpation
                                             palpationspeeds
                                                          speedsbetween
                                                                     betweenthe themale
                                                                                     maleand andfemale
                                                                                                  femaleparticipants.
                                                                                                           participants.
                                        The experimental procedure suggests that the stiffness difference between the two
                                 surfaces tended to decrease with an increasing number of trials in any given session.
                                 Figure 8 clearly illustrates the decrease in the average stiffness difference values across the
                                 four joints, as represented by quartiles based on the trial numbers. The repeated-measure
                                 analysis of variance revealed that there was a significant difference between the first and
                                 second quartiles and other quartiles’ values (p < 0.05), but the third and fourth quartile
                                 values were close to each other and showed no statistical significance in any of the analyzed
                                 joints. Therefore, we further dissected the palpation speed data into quartiles to potentially
                                 observe any patterns that may diminish in the aggregated data for any given session.
dal Technol.Multimodal  Technol.
             Interact. 2022,      Interact.
                             6, x FOR  PEER 2022, 6, 98
                                               REVIEW                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9 of 14     9 of 14




                                                   Avg. palpaion speed (mm/sec)


                                                                                    22.00                                                                                                                                                                          20.08
                                                                                                                                                                                       19.57
                                                                                                                                        18.14                                                                                                 17.06
                                                                                    18.00


                                                                                    14.00


                                                                                    10.00
                                                                                                                 0                          1                                                2                                                   3                      4

                                                                                                                        1. Metacarpophalangeal joint of index finger, 2. Wrist joint,
                                                                                                                                    3. Elbow joint, 4. Shoulder joint
           Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10 of 15
                                                   Figure 7. Average palpation speed of four pivot joints (mean ± standard error).
                                                                   Figure 7. Average palpation speed of four pivot joints (mean ± standard error).

                                                        The experimental procedure suggests that the stiffness difference between the two
                                                   surfacesMetacarpophalangeal    jointan
                                                             tended to decrease with    of increasing number of trialsWrist
                                                                                                                       in anyjoint
                                                                                                                              given session. Fig-
                                                                     index finger
                                                   ure 8 clearly illustrates the decrease in the average stiffness difference  values across the
                                                            0.40                                           0.40     a
                                                                     a
                                                   four joints, as represented  by quartiles based on the trial numbers. The repeated-measure
                                                   analysis of variance revealed that there was a significant difference between the first and
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Avg. stiffness diff. (N/mm)
                                                                           Avg. stiffness diff. (N/mm)




                                                            0.30
                                                   second quartiles                                        0.30but the third and fourth quartile
                                                                       and other quartiles’ values (p < 0.05),
                                                   values were close to each other and showed no statistical significance in any of the ana-
                                                   lyzed joints. Therefore,bwe further dissected the palpation             b
                                                            0.20                                           0.20 speed data into quartiles to po-
                                                   tentially observe any patterns c that may diminish in the aggregated data cfor anyc given
                                                   session.                              c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                                                                 0.10

                                            Metacarpophalangeal joint of                                                                                                                                     Wrist0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    joint
                                                   index finger
                                                          0.00
                                            0.40                 1st 2nd                                                                        3rd       4th 0.40                                a                                              1st     2nd      3rd       4th
                                                   a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Shoulder joint
                                                                                                                                                      Avg. stiffness diff. (N/mm)




                                                                                                                                  Elbow joint
              Avg. stiffness diff. (N/mm)




                                            0.30                                                                                                                                     0.30
                                                                                                                0.40         a                                                                                                         0.40          a
                                                                                                                b                                                                                                                      b
                                            0.20                                                                                                                                     0.20
                                                                                  Avg. stiffness diff. (N/mm)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Avg. stiffness diff. (N/mm)




                                                                                                                 0.30   c                                                                                                              0.30      c        c
                                                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                            0.10
                                                                                                                 0.20                   b                                                                                              0.20                   b
                                                                                                                                                  c                                 c 0.00                                                                         c
                                            0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c
                                                       1st                                                       0.10 3rd
                                                                                                                2nd               4th                                                            1st                                  2nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10 3rd          4th


                                                                                                                 0.00                                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                            1st     2nd         3rd                  4th                                                                         1st     2nd      3rd       4th

                                                                                                                        Figure 8. Relative stiffness difference between two virtual cylinders in quarterly subsets of the total
                                                                                                                        Figure 8. Relative stiffness difference between two virtual cylinders in quarterly subsets of the total
                                                                                                                        number of trials. Means labeled without a common letter are significantly different (p < 0.05).
                                                                                                                        number of trials. Means labeled without a common letter are significantly different (p < 0.05).

                                                                                                                              The
                                                                                                                              The palpation
                                                                                                                                  palpation speed
                                                                                                                                            speed onon the
                                                                                                                                                       the standard
                                                                                                                                                           standard stiffness
                                                                                                                                                                     stiffness side
                                                                                                                                                                               side recorded   in the
                                                                                                                                                                                     recorded in  the simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                       simulation for for each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          each
                                                                                                                        participant’s  response  was  separated   into four  divisions   based  on   the  quartiles
                                                                                                                        participant’s response was separated into four divisions based on the quartiles of total       of total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           trial
                                                                                                                        trial numbers.
                                                                                                                        numbers.         The average
                                                                                                                                   The average  of the of the palpation
                                                                                                                                                        palpation         speed of
                                                                                                                                                                   speed values   values
                                                                                                                                                                                     each of
                                                                                                                                                                                          25%each   25%
                                                                                                                                                                                                of the     of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                        total  trialtotal  trial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     numbers
                                                                                                                        numbers
                                                                                                                        was        was calculated
                                                                                                                              calculated            and is illustrated
                                                                                                                                         and is illustrated  in Figure in Figure
                                                                                                                                                                       9 for       9 forpivot
                                                                                                                                                                             the four    the four   pivot
                                                                                                                                                                                              joints.       joints.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       It can        It can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                be observed
                                                                                                                        observed from Figure 9 that the participants monotonically increased their average pal-
                                                                                                                        pation speed on the standard stiffness side (1.00 N/mm) through the quartiles for all four
                                                                                                                        joints. This showed that the participants in general had a tendency to increase their aver-
                                                                                                                        age speed across the quartiles with declining relative stiffness difference.
                                                                         Figure 8. Relative stiffness difference between two virtual cylinders in quarterly subsets of the total
                                                                         number of trials. Means labeled without a common letter are significantly different (p < 0.05).

                                                                              The palpation speed on the standard stiffness side recorded in the simulation for each
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                                                           10 of 14
                                                                        participant’s response was separated into four divisions based on the quartiles of total
                                                                        trial numbers. The average of the palpation speed values of each 25% of the total trial
                                                                        numbers was calculated and is illustrated in Figure 9 for the four pivot joints. It can be
                                                                      from  Figurefrom
                                                                        observed    9 thatFigure
                                                                                           the participants
                                                                                                  9 that the monotonically    increased their
                                                                                                              participants monotonically       average their
                                                                                                                                             increased   palpation  speed
                                                                                                                                                               average    pal-
                                                                      onpation
                                                                          the standard   stiffness side (1.00 N/mm)     through   the quartiles  for all four
                                                                                speed on the standard stiffness side (1.00 N/mm) through the quartiles for alljoints. This
                                                                                                                                                                         four
                                                                      showed    that the
                                                                        joints. This      participants
                                                                                     showed    that the in general had
                                                                                                        participants      a tendency
                                                                                                                      in general  had to  increase their
                                                                                                                                       a tendency          average
                                                                                                                                                    to increase     speed
                                                                                                                                                                 their  aver-
                                                                      across  the quartiles  with declining  relative stiffness difference.
                                                                        age speed across the quartiles with declining relative stiffness difference.

                                                         Metacarpophalangeal joint                                                                             Wrist joint
                                                              of index finger
                                                    24                                                                                            24
                 Avg. palpation speed (mm/sec)




                                                                                                                 Avg. palpation speed (mm/sec)




                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                    ab
                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                              a
                                                    20                             a
                                                                        a




                                                                                                                                                           b
                                                             b




                                                    16                                                                                            16

                                                    12                                                                                            12
                                                     8                                                                                             8
                                                     4                                                                                             4
                                                     0                                                                                             0
                                                            1st         2nd        3rd         4th                                                       1st       2nd        3rd        4th
                                                           Quartile    Quartile   Quartile   Quartile                                                  Quartile   Quartile   Quartile   Quartile


                                                                 Elbow joint                                                                                Shoulder joint
                                                    24                                                                                            24




                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                 Avg. palpaption speed (mm/sec)




                                                                                                                                                                              a
                    Avg. palpation speed (mm/sec)




                                                                                                                                                                    ab
                                                    20                                                                                            20
                                                                                              a
                                                                                   a




                                                                                                                                                          b
                                                                        a




                                                    16                                                                                            16
                                                             b




                                                    12                                                                                            12

                                                     8                                                                                             8

                                                     4                                                                                             4

                                                     0                                                                                             0
                                                             1st       2nd         3rd        4th                                                        1st       2nd        3rd        4th
                                                          Quartile    Quartile    Quartile    Quartile                                                 Quartile   Quartile   Quartile   Quartile



                                                                      Figure 9. Average palpation speeds on standard stiffness side in quarterly subsets of total number of
                                                                      trials (mean ± standard error). Means labeled without a common letter are significantly different
                                                                      (p < 0.05).

                                                                           We analyzed the differences in average palpation speed using the repeated-measure
                                                                      analysis of variance within the quartiles. For the metacarpophalangeal and elbow joints,
                                                                      the values of average palpation speed of the first quartile were significantly different from
                                                                      the values of other quartiles. For the wrist joint, only the values of the first and third
                                                                      quartiles were significantly different. For the shoulder joint, the values of the first quartile
                                                                      had statistically significant differences from those of the third and fourth quartiles. There
                                                                      was no significant difference among the palpation speed values of other quartiles.

                                                                      3.3. Palpation Force
                                                                           The average palpation force for the metacarpophalangeal joint of the index finger, the
                                                                      wrist joint, the elbow joint, and the shoulder joint were 8.8439 ± 0.513 N, 9.7273 ± 0.799 N,
                                                                      9.4554 ± 0.813 N, and 10.0812 ± 0.675 N, respectively (Figure 10). The average force values
                                                                      increased as the pivot joint moved from the metacarpophalangeal joint to the shoulder joint,
                                                                      while at the wrist and elbow joints, they were similar. There was no significant difference
                                                                      between these four average palpation forces. The male and female participants performed
                                                                      without any significant difference.
                                              The average palpation force for the metacarpophalangeal joint of the index finger,
                                         the wrist joint, the elbow joint, and the shoulder joint were 8.8439 ± 0.513 N, 9.7273 ± 0.799
                                         N, 9.4554 ± 0.813 N, and 10.0812 ± 0.675 N, respectively (Figure 10). The average force
                                         values increased as the pivot joint moved from the metacarpophalangeal joint to the
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98
                                         shoulder joint, while at the wrist and elbow joints, they were similar. There was no11 signif-
                                                                                                                                  of 14
                                         icant difference between these four average palpation forces. The male and female partic-
                                         ipants performed without any significant difference.


                                                                         12




                                     Avg. palpation force (N)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        10.0812
                                                                                                                                 9.7273                                       9.4554
                                                                         10
                                                                                                         8.8439


                                                                             8




                                                                             6
                                                                                 0                         1                       2                                            3                          4
                                                                                            1. Metacarpophalangeal joint of index finger, 2. Wrist joint,
                                                                                                        3. Elbow joint, 4. Shoulder joint
                                                                                                                                                  …
                                  Figure10.
                                 Figure  10.Average
                                             Averagepalpation
                                                     palpationforce
                                                               forceofofour
                                                                        fourpivot
                                                                             pivotjoints
                                                                                    joints(mean
                                                                                           (mean±±standard
                                                                                                   standarderror).
                                                                                                            error).

                                           The four
                                         The      four quartiles’ data dataofofaverage
                                                                                 averagepalpation
                                                                                           palpationforces  forfor
                                                                                                       forces   thethe
                                                                                                                    fourfour
                                                                                                                          joints   werewere
                                                                                                                                joints   also com-
                                                                                                                                               also
                                   puted (Figure
                                  computed         (Figure 11).11).
                                                                  This computation
                                                                    This  computationdrewdrewaaconclusion
                                                                                                 conclusion resembling            observationwe
                                                                                                              resembling the observation         we
                                   foundfor
                                  found       forthe
                                                   theaverage
                                                         averagespeed.
                                                                     speed.The
                                                                            Theaverage
                                                                                  averageforce
                                                                                            forcevalues
                                                                                                  valuesincreased
                                                                                                         increasedas asthe
                                                                                                                        thestiffness
                                                                                                                              stiffnessdifference
                                                                                                                                         difference
                                   decreased.Except
                                  decreased.          Exceptfor  forthe
                                                                     thewrist
                                                                         wristjoint,
                                                                                joint,the
                                                                                       theforce
                                                                                           forcevalue
                                                                                                 valueofofthe
                                                                                                           thefirst
                                                                                                               firstquartile
                                                                                                                     quartilewaswassignificantly
                                                                                                                                      significantly
                                   differentfrom
                                  different       from those
                                                           those ofof the other three
                                                                                  three quartiles.
                                                                                         quartiles.For
                                                                                                     Forthe
                                                                                                          thewrist
                                                                                                              wristjoint, thethe
                                                                                                                     joint,    average
                                                                                                                                   averagevalue  for
                                                                                                                                             value
                        Multimodalfor   first
                                   thethe
                                   Technol.     quartile
                                              first
                                            Interact. 2022, 6,showed
                                                      quartile    showed
                                                              x FOR PEERsignificant differences
                                                                           significant
                                                                         REVIEW                  withwith
                                                                                         differences   onlyonly
                                                                                                             the third quartile’s
                                                                                                                  the third          average
                                                                                                                             quartile’s       force12 of 14
                                                                                                                                          average
                                  force
                                   value. value.


                                                                         Metacarpophalangeal joint                                                                                   Wrist joint
                                                                              of index finger
                                                                        12                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                             ab



                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                       Avg. palpation force (N)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                        10
                                                                                                                     a




                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                          a




                                                                                                                                          Avg. palpation force (N)
                                                                                               a




                                                                                                                                                                                 b
                                                                                     b




                                                                         8                                                                                                8
                                                                         6                                                                                                6
                                                                         4                                                                                                4
                                                                         2                                                                                                2
                                                                         0                                                                                                0
                                                                                  First       Second       Third       Forth                                                    First       Second        Third       Forth
                                                                                 Quartile     Quartile    Quartile    Quartile                                                  Quartile    Quartile     Quartile    Quartile



                                                                                      Elbow joint                                                                                   Shoulder joint
                                                                        12                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                          a




                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                               a




                                                                        10                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                              Avg. palpation force (N)




                                                                                                                                                                                    b
                                             Avg. palpation force (N)




                                                                                     b




                                                                         8                                                                                                8
                                                                         6                                                                                                6
                                                                         4                                                                                                4
                                                                         2                                                                                                2
                                                                         0                                                                                                0
                                                                                   First      Second      Third       Forth                                                      First       Second        Third        Forth
                                                                                  Quartile    Quartile   Quartile    Quartile                                                    Quartile    Quartile     Quartile     Quartile



                                                       Figure 11. forces
                                 Figure 11. Average palpation      Average  palpation
                                                                         applied      forces applied
                                                                                  on standard        on standard
                                                                                                stiffness side in stiffness
                                                                                                                  quarterly side in quarterly
                                                                                                                              subsets  of the subsets
                                                                                                                                              total of the
                                                       total number of trials (mean ± standard error). Means labeled without a common letter are signifi-
                                 number of trials (mean    ± different
                                                       cantly standard(perror).
                                                                          < 0.05).Means labeled without a common letter are significantly
                                 different (p < 0.05).
                                                       4. Discussion
                                                                                                   The selection of the pivot joint that users utilize for any haptic exploration task in a
                                                                                              virtual environment can vary depending on the task itself, the design implementation of
                                                                                              the simulation that incorporates that task, and individual preference. Therefore, it is im-
                                                                                              portant that we gain insight into how this selection affects the performance of a given task
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                      12 of 14




                                       4. Discussion
                                             The selection of the pivot joint that users utilize for any haptic exploration task in
                                       a virtual environment can vary depending on the task itself, the design implementation
                                       of the simulation that incorporates that task, and individual preference. Therefore, it is
                                       important that we gain insight into how this selection affects the performance of a given
                                       task so that both users and designers of such simulations may make informed decisions.
                                       We know that our perception of stiffness is influenced by various factors including the
                                       existence of tactile and/or proprioceptive feedback, the visual feedback received while
                                       an object of interest deforms under applied load, the speed of haptic exploration, and the
                                       stiffness difference between the objects. We do not know, however, if the pivot joint used
                                       during a task is also one of these influential factors. In that direction, the current study
                                       aimed to address the effect of selecting the pivot joint using a stiffness discrimination task.
                                       We analyzed the effect of the pivot (or support) joint specifically on stiffness discrimination
                                       using three different measures: the Weber fraction, palpation speed, and palpation force
                                       by means of a psychophysical experiment. The presented methodology, however, can be
                                       applied to tasks other than stiffness discrimination and, therefore, has the potential to be
                                       expanded to other aspects of touch.
                                             The Weber fraction has widely been used to quantify an individual’s ability to dis-
                                       criminate differences in various modalities such as perception of weight, temperature, and
                                       auditory feedback. We used the Weber fraction in a similar manner; that is, as a quantifiable
                                       measure for performance changed as the participants used a different pivot joint in a con-
                                       trolled experiment. The results of the average Weber fraction demonstrated a monotonic
                                       decrease as the pivot joint shifted toward the torso, resulting in the smallest average Weber
                                       fraction at the shoulder joint. Although these differences in the average Weber fraction
                                       between the joints were not significant, they suggested that the users might become more
                                       sensitive to stiffness discrimination in a virtual world when more joints of the human arm
                                       are involved in the procedure. This, in a sense, can be initially interpreted as the amount
                                       of information received in the form of proprioceptive feedback from the joints increases
                                       as more joints are involved. The fact that the differences were not significant, however,
                                       suggests that the pivot joint, at least during a stiffness discrimination task, eventually does
                                       not play a role in an individual’s performance in the stiffness discrimination task.
                                             As for the average palpation speed and force, they were both observed to increase as
                                       the pivot joint moved closer to the torso (i.e., a shift from the metacarpophalangeal joint to
                                       the shoulder joint) with the exception of the elbow joint. While using the shoulder joint, the
                                       participants palpated with the highest speed and force. Combined with the results from
                                       the Weber fraction, it can be concluded that using the metacarpophalangeal joint as the
                                       pivot seems to be the most advantageous, as incorporating a haptic interface with relatively
                                       less force capacity would not affect the individual’s performance.
                                             We also observed that, with the decrease in the stiffness difference between the two
                                       palpated surfaces, the average palpation speed and the average palpation force both
                                       increased monotonically. These results suggest that the participants used higher force and
                                       speed in order to resolve the situations in which the discrimination task became somewhat
                                       complicated. This prompts more attention to be paid when predicting the amount of force
                                       from the users in a specific haptic exploration task, especially when users are expected
                                       to navigate through environments that possess quantifiably similar properties such as
                                       stiffness. Additionally, the average palpation speed was found to have no correlation with
                                       the average Weber fraction of individual participants for any of the joints, suggesting that
                                       the speed at which the surfaces were palpated did not indicate any change in sensitivity for
                                       discriminating stiffness differences.
                                             In this study, mainly due to the tedious nature of the employed psychophysical
                                       experimentation technique, we examined the effect of arm pivot joints on the stiffness
                                       discrimination task by using one single standard stiffness of 1.0 N/mm, which is close to
                                       the stiffness of human soft tissue [19]. Further investigation can be carried out with various
                                       standard stiffness values to investigate the repeatability of the observed results of this
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                            13 of 14




                                       study. Additionally, we do not utilize only our ability to discriminate stiffness differences
                                       while exploring and manipulating haptic environments; therefore, the same procedure
                                       described herein can be applied to other touch-relevant tasks such as force direction angle
                                       and height discrimination tasks that would help generalize the effect of arm pivot joints as
                                       far as the overall experience of haptic manipulation is considered. Finally, the participant
                                       population used for testing could be a factor; for instance, simulated haptic experiences
                                       for users of a specific profession (dentists, doctors of allopathic or osteopathic medicine,
                                       etc.) can be studied for a more complete understanding of the effect of arm pivot joints on
                                       different populations.

                                       5. Conclusions
                                             We analyzed the effect of four pivot joints of the arm on stiffness discrimination ability
                                       through a comparative analysis of the Weber fraction, palpation speed, and palpation force.
                                       From thirty-eight participants, the Weber fraction for four pivot joints (the metacarpopha-
                                       langeal joint of the index finger, wrist, elbow, and shoulder joints) were 0.14, 0.13, 0.13, and
                                       0.12, respectively. When palpation speed and force were considered, there were certain
                                       tendencies across the pivot joints, especially in the form of monotonic increase as the pivot
                                       joint approached the torso, but these differences were not significant. In a similar manner,
                                       the Weber fractions showed no significant difference across the pivot joints, suggesting
                                       that the selection of the pivot joint did not have an effect on the sensitivity to discriminate
                                       stiffness differences.

                                       Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.K.; data curation, K.N.H.; formal analysis, E.K. and
                                       K.N.H.; investigation, E.K. and K.N.H.; methodology, E.K.; project administration, E.K.; resources,
                                       E.K.; software, E.K.; supervision, E.K.; validation, K.N.H.; writing—original draft preparation, E.K.
                                       and K.N.H.; writing—review and editing, E.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published
                                       version of the manuscript.
                                       Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                       Institutional Review Board Statement: The approval of the IRB at Central Michigan University,
                                       Mount Pleasant, MI, was received under protocol number 2020-351.
                                       Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all participants involved in
                                       the study.
                                       Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Williams, R.L., II; Srivastava, M.; Howell, J.N.; Conatser, R.R.; Eland, D.C.; Janet Burns, D.M.; Anthony Chila, D.G. The Virtual
      Haptic Back for Palpatory Training General Terms: Experimentation, Human Factors. In Proceedings of the 6th international
      conference on Multimodal interfaces, State College, PA, USA, 14–15 October 2004.
2.    Kim, L.; Park, S.H. Haptic Interaction and Volume Modeling Techniques for Realistic Dental Simulation. Vis. Comput. 2006, 22,
      90–98. [CrossRef]
3.    Kosuki, Y.; Okada, Y. 3D Visual Component Based Development System for Medical Training Systems Supporting Haptic Devices
      and Their Collaborative Environments. In Proceedings of the 2012 Sixth International Conference on Complex, Intelligent, and
      Software Intensive Systems, Palermo, Italy, 4–6 July 2012; pp. 687–692.
4.    Rodríguez, J.L.; Velázquez, R.; Del-Valle-soto, C.; Gutiérrez, S.; Varona, J.; Enríquez-Zarate, J. Active and Passive Haptic Perception
      of Shape: Passive Haptics Can Support Navigation. Electronics 2019, 8, 355. [CrossRef]
5.    Tan, H.Z.; Durlach, N.I.; Beauregard, G.L.; Srinivasan, M.A. Manual Discrimination of Compliance Using Active Pinch Grasp:
      The Roles of Force and Work Cues. Percept. Psychophys. 1995, 57, 495–510. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Lécuyer, A.; Coquillart, S.; Kheddar, A.; Richard, P.; Coiffet, P. Pseudo-Haptic Feedback: Can Isometric Input Devices Simulate
      Force Feedback? In Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality 2000 (Cat. No. 00CB37048), New Brunswick, NJ, USA, 18–22 March
      2000; pp. 83–90.
7.    Genecov, A.M.; Stanley, A.A.; Okamura, A.M. Perception of a Haptic Jamming Display: Just Noticeable Differences in Stiffness
      and Geometry. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS), Houston, TX, USA, 20 March 2014; pp. 333–338.
8.    Allin, S.; Matsuoka, Y.; Klatzky, R. Measuring Just Noticeable Differences for Haptic Force Feedback: Implications for Rehabilita-
      tion. In Proceedings of the 10th Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, HAPTICS
      2002, Orlando, FL, USA, 24–25 March 2002; pp. 299–302.
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2022, 6, 98                                                                                      14 of 14




9.    Fu, W.; Landman, A.; van Paassen, M.M.; Mulder, M. Modeling Human Difference Threshold in Perceiving Mechanical Properties
      from Force. IEEE Trans. Hum. Mach. Syst. 2018, 48, 359–368. [CrossRef]
10.   Laming, D. Sensory Analysis; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986.
11.   Norwich, K.H. On the Theory of Weber Fractions. Percept. Psychophys. 1987, 42, 286–298. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Maereg, A.T.; Nagar, A.; Reid, D.; Secco, E.L. Wearable Vibrotactile Haptic Device for Stiffness Discrimination during Virtual
      Interactions. Front. Robot. AI 2017, 4, 42. [CrossRef]
13.   De Gersem, G. Kinaesthetic Feedback and Enhanced Sensitivity in Robotic Endoscopic Telesurgery. Cathol. Univ. Leuven 2005, 7.
      Available online: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Kinaesthetic-Feedback-and-Enhanced-Sensitivity-in-Gersem/21
      5b0d3f18d0b530ff66a4634bab7c44c7061d08 (accessed on 30 September 2022).
14.   Son, B.; Park, J. Haptic Feedback to the Palm and Fingers for Improved Tactile Perception of Large Objects. In Proceedings of the
      31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Berlin, Germany, 14–17 October 2018; pp. 757–763.
15.   Karadogan, E.; Williams, R.L., II; Howell, J.N.; Conatser, R.R. A Stiffness Discrimination Experiment Including Analysis of
      Palpation Forces and Velocities. Simul. Healthc. 2010, 5, 279–288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Leek, M.R. Adaptive Procedures in Psychophysical Research. Percept. Psychophys. 2001, 63, 1279–1292. [CrossRef]
17.   Walker, L.; Tan, H.Z. A Perceptual Study on Haptic Rendering of Surface Topography When Both Surface Height and Stiffness
      Vary. In Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems,
      HAPTICS’04, Chicago, IL, USA, 27–28 March 2004; pp. 138–145.
18.   Gescheider, G.A. Psychophysics: The Fundamentals; Psychology Press: London, UK, 2013; ISBN 113480122X.
19.   Oh, D.; Lee, S.; Choi, Y. Simultaneous Stiffness Measurement Device for a Human Forearm. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 15313–15321.
      [CrossRef]
