A Six Degrees of Freedom Haptic Interface for Laparoscopic Training
Wisdom C. Agboh
Mustafa Yalcin
Volkan Patoglu
Abstract— We present the novel kinematics, workspace char-
acterization, functional prototype and impedance control of
a six degrees of freedom haptic interface designed to train
surgeons for laparoscopic procedures, through virtual reality
simulations. The parallel kinematics of the device is constructed
by connecting a 3RRP planar parallel mechanism to a linearly
actuated modiﬁed delta mechanism with a connecting link. The
conﬁguration level forward and inverse kinematics of the device
assume analytic solutions, while its workspace can be shaped to
enable large end-effector translations and rotations, making it
well-suited for laparoscopy operations. Furthermore, the haptic
interface features a low apparent inertia with high structural
stiffness, thanks to its parallel kinematics with grounded ac-
tuators. A model-based open-loop impedance controller with
feed-forward gravity compensation has been implemented for
the device and various virtual tissue/organ stiffness levels have
been rendered.
I. INTRODUCTION
Laparoscopy, a commonly used minimally invasive sur-
gical procedure, utilizes slender surgical tools and cameras
inserted into the abdomen of a patient through small ports
(typically, 5–15 mm in diameter) on the skin, enabling
the surgeon to perform numerous procedures without large
incisions, as is the case with conventional open surgery. In
the recent years, the number of minimally invasive surgi-
cal procedures has increased greatly and this approach is
currently considered as the preferable surgical procedure
for a large number of treatments [16], [24]. In comparison
with traditional open surgical procedures, laparoscopy offers
reductions in trauma, post-operative pain, recovery time,
scarring and blood loss for the patient and is more cost-
effective due to the reduced risk of complications, shorter
hospital stays and less medication requirements [10], [12].
Despite numerous advantages laparoscopy presents for
patients, it is quite difﬁcult to master for surgeons. Unlike the
traditional open surgery, during laparoscopy, the surgeon’s
hand motions are reﬂected about the incision point, known as
the fulcrum effect, access to the patient’s body is restricted,
and only 2D visual feedback is available resulting in a loss of
vital depth perception. Furthermore, laparoscopy instruments
have a limited range of motion and haptic/touch information
is reduced while using these devices [11], [15].
Due to the difﬁculty in mastering laparoscopy, surgical
training is indispensable and effective training approaches are
crucial. Conventionally training involves the use of patients,
cadavers and animals. This approach is disadvantageous,
since a cadaver neither breathes nor bleeds, animal and
This work has been partially supported by TUBITAK Grant 115M698.
W. C. Agboh, M. Yalcin and V. Patoglu are with the Faculty of
Engineering and Natural Sciences at Sabancı University, Istanbul, Turkey.
{wisdomagboh,myalcin,vpatoglu}@sabanciuniv.edu
human tissues do not possess the same properties and the
availability of animals or human cadavers is quite limited
for surgical training. In addition, the conventional training
does not provide a means to precisely evaluate a surgeon’s
skill or level of experience [8].
Virtual reality (VR) simulation, where a trainee virtually
interacts with human tissue, is a viable alternative to the
conventional laparoscopic surgical training, bridging the gap
between the learning process and actually carrying out the
in vivo surgery. VR simulation not only reduces the training
costs and number of animal/cadaver experiments, but also
makes it possible for the surgical tasks to be repeated as
much as required [23].
Even though all VR simulation involve realistic visual
feedback, force feedback may not be available. VR simu-
lations without force feedback is disadvantageous, since the
surgeon can only acquire skills related to the tool motion
without establishing an understanding of the forces required
to accomplish such motions in the human body with minimal
injury to surrounding tissue. VR surgical trainers without
force feedback include the surgeon consoles of daVinci
Surgical System [12] and Zeus Surgical System [25].
The incorporation of force feedback into VR simulation
enhances the surgeon’s perception of pulling and grasping
maneuvers, such that surgeons can grasp tissues with less
force and without causing scars. Consequently, this improves
the trainee’s overall performance [22], [26]. In the literature,
[1], [3], [13], [20], [29] present master devices with force
feedback. These devices possess up to 4 degrees of freedom
(DoF) and are considered sufﬁcient under the assumption that
the laparoscopic tool is tightly constrained in the abdomen.
Even though constraining the trocar after the initial in-
sertion to only 4 DoF is meaningful for many laparoscopic
procedures, the ability to move the trocar location is neces-
sary for the initial tool insertion, as well as to simulate tissue
stiffness around the trocar. In particular, during laparoscopy,
the trocar is inserted through the incision point which should
be at least 50% larger than the trocar diameter [6]. During the
initial tool insertion, the trocar is moved within the incision
as required to avoid damage to the internal organs. Given
that half of the major injuries related to laparoscopy take
place due to the initial tool insertion [17], it is crucial for
laparoscopic training devices to allow for the translational
DoF of the trocar to train surgeons about its placement to
minimize insertion related complications. Furthermore, the
trocar translations also introduce some ﬂexibility when the
incision points are wrongly placed on the abdomen, as small
tool translations in these ports can save the surgeon from
making extra incisions on the patient’s body and increasing
2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
Daejeon Convention Center
October 9-14, 2016, Daejeon, Korea
978-1-5090-3762-9/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
1107
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the risk of complications. In addition to training proper
trocar placement, the translational degrees of freedom at the
incision point can be used to render various tissue stiffness
at this interaction point and to estimate the stresses that take
place at the incision. Proper control of interaction forces
at the incision is important to ensure precise tool control
without inducing scaring of the surrounding tissue.
Several six DoF haptic interfaces with serial kinematics,
such as Phantom [21] and Virtuose 6D [2], have been em-
ployed for laparoscopic training. Even though these devices
possess relatively large workspace, they suffer from low
stiffness and force output capacity. In particular, the mean
and maximum force requirements during laparoscopy are
reported as 8.5 N and 68 N, respectively [7], while abdominal
wall stiffness can be up to 2.2 N/mm [27]. On the other
hand, 6 DoF parallel haptic devices, such as [14], [18],
[19], [30], feature small footprint, high force bandwidths,
high stiffness, passive backdrivability and low inertia, since
their actuators can be grounded. However, none of these
haptic interfaces possess a workspace that is well-suited for
laparoscopic training.
We present a 6 DoF haptic interface for laparoscopic
training. The device features novel parallel kinematics that
not only allows for high force control bandwidth through
the grounding of all of its actuators, but also possesses a
workspace that is well-suited for laparoscopy. In particular,
the device has large translation workspace relative to the
tool’s axis, while it is also capable of performing virtually
unlimited roll rotations about this axis. Large stroke is useful
for surgical training, since a long tool insertion across the
abdomen is required in many cases, such as in hernia repair.
Large roll workspace is also crucial, since a 270◦roll rotation
is needed for driving a needle through a tissue in just a single
movement. Eliminating the need for re-grabbing lessens the
burden on the surgeon to pay attention to the initial tool
conﬁguration during these maneuvers. Furthermore, after the
laproscope has been introduced into the abdomen, it needs to
be rotated by 360◦about its axis, to visually check for bowel
injuries by inspecting the tool for any adherent bowels [5].
II. MECHANISM TYPE SELECTION
Surgical training requires multiple DoF: 4 DoF (for pitch,
yaw, roll and tool insertion) are required when the trocar
location is ﬁxed and extra two DoF are required for locating
the trocar and/or allowing tissue deformations at the incision
point. Along these lines, we design a 6 DoF haptic interface,
which allows for a large tool translation along and an
unlimited rotation about the tool axis.
A fully parallel mechanism is preferred, since these
mechanisms possess some inherent advantages over serial
mechanisms in satisfying requirements of force feedback
applications. In particular, parallel mechanisms offer com-
pact designs with high stiffness and have low effective
inertia, since their actuators can be grounded. In terms of
dynamic performance, high position and force bandwidths
are achievable with parallel mechanisms thanks to their light
weight but stiff structure. Furthermore, parallel mechanisms
2-Axis Gimball
           +
Prismatic Joint
N
(Base)
Spherical
    Joint
R
(Tool)
D
T
E
Fig. 1: Kinematics of the device: a linear modiﬁed delta
mechanism, a 3RRP planar parallel mechanism, and the tool
connecting them.
do not superimpose position errors at joints; hence, can
achieve higher precision.
The novel kinematics of the device, is constructed by
connecting two 3 DoF parallel mechanisms to achieve the
desired tool workspace. In particular, a 3RRP planar parallel
mechanisms is connected to a linear modiﬁed delta mecha-
nism with the tool, as shown in Figure 1. The end-effector of
the delta mechanism can perform 3 DoF translations in space,
while the 3RRP mechanism can perform 2 DoF translations
and 1 DoF rotation in plane. None of these mechanisms
have singularities within their regular workspace. For the
underlying kinematics, a linear delta mechanism is chosen,
since large tool insertion/retraction can be easily achieved
by modifying the linear stroke of the actuators of this
mechanism. Similarly, a 3RRP mechanism is preferred, since
it can provide virtually unlimited translations in plane, which
can be easily mapped to the rotation of the laparoscopic tool
about its axis.
To construct the haptic interface in Figure 1, the 3RRP
and linear modiﬁed delta mechanisms are grounded such that
their end-effectors face each other. One end of the tool is
attached to the end-effector of the delta mechanism with a
spherical joint, such that the location of this end of the tool
can be controlled by the delta mechanism. Then, a two axis
gimbal in series with a prismatic joint is attached to the end-
effector of the 3RRP mechanism, such that the tool can pass
through the prismatic joint. This way, the 3RRP mechanism
can directly control where the tool intersects the plane of its
end-effector, as well as the rotation of the tool about its axis.
1108
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
β
α
θ
x
y
z
Fig. 2: 6 DoF (x, y, z, roll (θ), pitch (β), yaw (α))
movements of the laparoscopic tool
Figure 2 depicts the 6 DoF movements of the laparoscopic
tool. The left/right and forward/backward motions of the
tool (trocar) can be controlled by moving both the 3RRP
and delta mechanisms with an equal amount in parallel
planes, while the insertion of the tool can be controlled by
translating the delta mechanism in a direction normal to these
planes. The rotation of the tool about its own axis (roll) is
directly controlled by the rotation of the 3RRP, while the left-
right (yaw) and forward-backward (pitch) rotations of the
tool about the incision point can be controlled by relative
movements of the two mechanisms in parallel planes, as
depicted in Figure 3.
III. KINEMATIC ANALYSIS
The kinematics of the haptic device can be derived by
studying each of its three main components: the linear mod-
iﬁed delta mechanism, the 3RRP mechanism and the tool.
Each of these components has analytical conﬁguration level
forward and inverse kinematics. In particular, the conﬁgura-
tion level inverse and forward kinematics of linear delta and
3RRP mechanism assume analytical solutions as documented
in [4] and [28], respectively. Given the kinematics of these
two mechanisms, the inverse and forward kinematics of the
proposed device can be analytically derived as follows:
A. Conﬁguration Level Forward Kinematics
For the forward kinematics, the position (xd, yd, zd) of the
end-effector of the delta mechanism and the position (xt, yt)
and orientation (θt) of the 3RRP mechanism are provided
and the orientation of the tool and the position of the tool
tip need to be determined. A schematic representation of the
tool, together with relevant reference frames and points are
presented in Figure 3. Bodies R, T, D, and N represent the
tool, the end-effector of 3RRP mechanism, the end-effector
of the linear delta mechanism and the Newtonian reference
frame, respectively. A vector basis is attached to each of
these bodies. Point O is ﬁxed in N, while Point A denotes
the location where the spherical joint is attached at the end-
effector of linear delta mechanism. The tool tip is represented
by Point E.
n1
n2
R
T
D
R
T
D
R
T
D
α
θ
β
zt
zt
O
O
N
N
E
B
A
n1
n3
n2
n3
E
A
B
Fig. 3: The relevant bodies and points for kinematic analysis
of the connecting link
Let the position vectors from O to A and B be deﬁned as
rOA
=
xd n1 +yd n2 −zd n3
(1)
rOB
=
xt n1 +yt n2 +zt n3
(2)
respectively. A unit vector ˆt along the tool axis can be
obtained by normalizing rAB = rOB −rOA, while the position
vector form O to E is given by rOE = rAE −rAO with rAE = l ˆt,
where l denotes the length of the tool. Then,
rOE = xen1 +yen2 +zen3
(3)
where
xe
=
l(xt −xd)
M
+xd
(4)
ye
=
l(yt −yd)
M
+yd
(5)
ze
=
l(zt +zd)
M
−zd
(6)
and M =
 (xt −xd)2 +(yt −yd)2 +(zt +zd)2 1
2 .
Let the orientation of the tool R with respect to N be
deﬁned by the roll (θ), yaw (α) and pitch (β) rotations as
depicted in Figure 2. The roll rotation of the device end-
effector is equal to the in plane rotation (θt) of the 3RRP
mechanism. Other rotations can be calculated as
θ
=
θt
(7)
α
=
atan2((xt −xd),(zt +zd))
(8)
β
=
atan2((yt −yd),(zt +zd))
(9)
B. Conﬁguration Level Inverse Kinematics
Given the tip position (xe, ye, ze) and orientation (α, β,
θ) of the tool, the end-effector position of the delta (xd, yd,
zd) and the end-effector position (xt, yt) and orientation (θt)
1109
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
JR
=


1+ l(xd −xt)2
M3
−1
M
l(xd −xt)(yd −yt)
M3
l(zt +zd)(xd −xt)
M3
l((zt +zd)2 +(yd −yt)2)
M3
−l(xd −xt)(yd −yt)
M3
0
l(xd −xt)(yd −yt)
M3
1+l(yd −yt)2
M3
−1
M
l(zt +zd)(yd −yt)
M3
−l(xd −xt)(yd −yt)
M3
l((zt +zd)2 +(xd −xt)2)
M3
0
−l(zt +zd)(xd −xt)
M3
−l(zt +zd)(yd −yt)
M3
−1+ 1
M −l(zt +zd)2
M3
l(zt +zd)(xd −xt)
M3
l(zt +zd)(yd −yt)
M3
0
0
−(zt +zd)cos(α)
k2
yd −yt
k2
0
zt +zd
k2
−sin(α)
−(zt +zd)cos(β)
k1
0
(xd −xt)cos(β)
k1
(zt +zd)cos(β)k1
0
sin(β)cos(α)
(zt +zd)sin(β)
k1
0
−(xd −xt)sin(β)
k1
−(zt +zd)sin(β)
k1
0
cos(α)cos(β)


where k1 = (zt +zd)2 +(xd −xt)2 and k2 = (zt +zd)2 +(yd −yt)2.
of the 3RRP mechanism can be calculated as
θt
=
θ
(10)
xt
=
xe +tan(α)(zt −ze)
(11)
yt
=
ye +tan(β)(zt −ze)
(12)
xd
=
l(c5)tan(α)
c1(ze −zt) −c2
(13)
yd
=
l(c5)tan(β)
c1(ze −zt) −c3
(14)
zd
=
c4 −
l(c5)
c1(ze −zt)
(15)
where
c1
=
tan2(α)+tan2(β)+1
c2
=
l2 tan(α)
c1(ze −zt) −xe
c3
=
l2 tan(β)
c1(ze −zt) −ye
c4
=
l2
c1(ze −zt) −ze
c5
=
l +√c1(zt −ze)
C. Motion Level Kinematics
Let the angular velocity of the tool R with respect to
N be given as NωR = ωexn1 +ωeyn2 +ωezn3, while the tip
velocity in N is deﬁned as NvE = ˙xen1 + ˙yen2 + ˙zen3. The
kinematic Jacobian JR relating end-effector velocities of
linear delta and 3RRP mechanisms to tool velocities can be
derived as

˙xe ˙ye ˙ze ωex ωey ωez
T = JR

˙xd ˙yd ˙zd ˙xt ˙yt ˙θt
T
(16)
where JR is presented at the top of the page. If JT and
JD respectively denote the Jacobian of the 3RRP and the
linear delta mechanisms, relating their end-effector velocities
to their actuator velocities, the kinematic Jacobian J of the
device, characterizing the map between the tool velocities to
actuator velocities of linear delta and 3RRP mechanisms can
be derived as
J = JR

JD
0
0
JT

(17)
IV. WORKSPACE ANALYSIS
Figure 4 presents the reachable workspace of the haptic
interface for a tool length of 150 mm, a 3RRP workspace of
60 mm radius and a modiﬁed linear delta mechanism with
120 mm stroke. The workspace characterization considers
the physical limits of the spherical joint and self collisions
of the device.
The workspace of the device can be easily adjusted for
a given laparoscopic procedure by performing an optimal
dimensional synthesis, where the radius of the 3RRP mech-
anism, the stroke and the distal link lengths of the linear delta
mechanism are considered as design variables. In particular,
the yaw and pitch rotations of the tool can be increased by
increasing the radius of 3RRP and/or modifying the stroke of
the linear delta mechanism, as can be deduced from Eqns. (8)
and (9).
Fig. 4: The reachable workspace of the prototype
V. IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 5 presents a prototype of the laparoscopic haptic
interface. The 3RRP mechanism is constructed utilizing three
large diameter, slim, concentric ball bearings. These rings
are actuated by grounded, direct drive coreless DC motors
coupled to a capstan transmission to achieve low friction
and backlash. The large ring diameters help to achieve a
large transmission ratio. The mechanism is grounded by a
hollow cylinder rigidly attached to the inner rings of the
1110
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Tool handle
Tool
2-axis gimball
            +
Prismatic joint
3RRP mechanism
Fixed base
Linear
delta
Tool
3RRP Mechanism
Tool
Linear Delta
Spherical
Joint
Tool
Fig. 5: The force feedback laparoscopic training robot
concentric ball bearings. Even though 3RRP mechanism can
provide virtually unlimited rotations, a 480◦limit is imposed
by the thickness of the rings and the routing of the capstan
cables. The center of the mechanism is hollow, which allows
the tool to pass through. The symmetric end-effector of the
3RRP mechanism is constructed using three aluminum shafts
rigidly connected at their center with a 120◦angle between
the shafts. A two axis gimbal in series with a prismatic joint
is attached to the center of this end-effector.
The linear modiﬁed delta mechanism is constructed using
carbon ﬁber links that feature high strength to weight ratio.
The delta mechanism is actuated using three direct drive
linear motors with embedded encoders. Direct drive actuation
minimizes transmission related frictional loss and backlash.
All three linear actuators are grounded. A high precision
spherical joint is attached to the end-effector of the delta
mechanism, which is connected to one end of the tool. The
tool is chosen as a slender aluminum rod with a square cross
section.
VI. CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
The prototype is built as an impedance-type device, fea-
turing grounded actuators, high stiffness components, low
apparent inertia, and with minimal hard to model parasitic
effects, such as friction and backlash. Consequently, an
open loop impedance controller with feed-forward gravity
compensation is implemented for real-time control of the
device.
To evaluate the control performance of the device, several
virtual ﬁxtures along x and y directions of the tool have
been rendered as linear springs with stiffness ranging from
that of a typical soft tissue to a cartilage type tissue in
the human body. Figure 6 presents force-deﬂection data
measured for these renderings, by applying known forces
to the laparoscopic tool at the virtual incision point and
measuring its displacement. Best linear ﬁts on the data are
also presented.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Displacement [mm]
Force [N]
x 5 N/mm data
x 5 N/mm fit
x 15 N/mm data
x 15 N/mm fit
y 6 N/mm data
y 6 N/mm fit
y 18 N/mm data
y 18 N/mm fit
Fig. 6: Virtual ﬁxtures along x and y directions
Table I presents R2 value characterizing the quality of the
line ﬁt, the slope of these lines, and the rendering error. These
results indicate that even under open loop impedance control
(without force feedback), the device can achieve high ﬁdelity
impedance renderings with RMS errors less than 4%.
To evaluate the trajectory tracking performance of the de-
vice, a chirp signal with a 40 mm amplitude and frequencies
increasing up to 1 Hz is applied as the reference motion
along the axis of the tool. Figure 7 presents a sample plot
1111
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I: Spring rendering results for the device
Axis
Desired
stiffness
[N/mm]
Slope of
ﬁtted line
[N/mm]
Rendering
error [%]
Quality of
ﬁt (R2)
x
5
4.9
3.0
0.993
x
15
14.4
3.8
0.974
y
6
5.8
3.7
0.992
y
18
17.5
3.0
0.988
demonstrating the chirp signal tracking performance of the
device. The RMS error for this trajectory tracking task is
calculated as 0.3%, indicating that the impedance controller
can also achieve good motion tracking performance.
0
1
2
3
4
5
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
Time [s]
Z [mm]
 
Measured
Reference signal
Fig. 7: Trajectory tacking performance of the device under
impedance control
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented the kinematics, workspace characteri-
zation, functional prototype and real-time impedance control
of a novel 6 DoF haptic interface designed for laparoscopic
training. The device features parallel kinematics that assume
analytical solutions. The kinematics also allows of all actua-
tors to be grounded to archive low apparent inertia at the tool.
An impedance-type device has been implemented through
use of direct drive actuation and capstan transmission to
ensure low friction and backlash, and open loop impedance
control performance of the device has been shown to be
adequate for haptic simulations.
Ongoing studies include optimal dimensional synthesis of
the device [9] and experimental evaluation of the effective-
ness of the device during laparoscopic training, especially to
investigate the importance of stiffness rendering around the
incision point for training trocar placement procedures.
REFERENCES
[1] Force Dimension Inc.
http://www.forcedimension.com.
Accessed
2015.
[2] Haption. http://www.haption.com. Accessed 2015.
[3] Novint. http://www.novint.com. Accessed 2015.
[4] R.L.
Williams
II,
“The
Delta
Parallel
Robot:
Kinematics
Solutions”,
Internet
Publication.
www.ohio.edu/people/williar4/html/pdf/DeltaKin.pdf. 2015.
[5] Royal
College
of
Obstetricians
and
Gynacologists:
Pre-
venting
entry-related
gynaecological
laparoscopic
injuries.
http://bsge.org.uk/guidelines.php. Accessed 2015.
[6] R. Alberto, B. Renaud, and E. C. Baldo. Manual of Laparoscopic
Urology. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[7] J. Brown, J. Rosen, L. Chang, M. Sinanan, and B. Hannaford.
Quantifying Surgeon Grasping Mechanics in Laparoscopy Using the
Blue Dragon System. Stud Health Technol Inform., 98:34–36, 2004.
[8] J. Dankelman, M. Chmarra, E. Verdaasdonk, L. Stassen, and C. Grim-
bergen. Fundamental aspects of learning minimally invasive surgical
skills. Minim Invasive Ther Allied Technol, 14(4):247–56, 2005.
[9] A. Erdogan, B. Celebi, A. C. Satici, and V. Patoglu. AssistOn-Ankle:
A reconﬁgurable ankle exoskeleton with series-elastic actuation. Au-
tonomous Robotics, 2016.
[10] T. Frank, G. Hanna, and A. Cuschieri.
Technological aspects of
minimal access surgery.
Proc. of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine, 211(2):129–
144, 1997.
[11] A. Gallagher, N. McClure, J. McGuigan, K. Ritchie, and N. Sheehy.
An ergonomic analysis of the fulcrum effect in the acquisition of
endoscopic skills. Endoscopy, 30(7):617–20, 1998.
[12] G. Guthart and J. Salisbury, J. The IntuitiveTM telesurgery system:
overview and application.
In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, volume 1, pages 618–621 vol.1, 2000.
[13] R. Hendrix, N. Rosielle, and H. Nijmeijer.
Design of a haptic
master interface for robotically assisted vitreo-retinal eye surgery. In
International Conference on Advanced Robotics, pages 1–6, 2009.
[14] V. M. Hung and U. J. Na. Tele-operation of a 6-DOF serial robot using
a new 6-DOF haptic interface. In IEEE International Symposium on
Haptic Audio-Visual Environments and Games, pages 1–6, 2010.
[15] D. Jones, J. Brewer, and N. Soper. The inﬂuence of three-dimensional
video systems on laparoscopic task performance.
Surg Laparosc
Endosc, 6(3):191–7, 1996.
[16] M. W. Khan and M. M. Aziz. Experience in laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy. Mymensingh Medical Journal: MMJ, 19(01):77–84, 2010.
[17] S. Krishnakumar and P. Tambe. Entry Complications in Laparoscopic
Surgery. J Gynecol Endosc Surg, 1(1):4–11, 2009.
[18] S. U. Lee and S. Kim. Analysis and Optimal Design of a New 6 DOF
Parallel Type Haptic Device. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 460–465, 2006.
[19] G. Long and C. Collins. A pantograph linkage parallel platform master
hand controller for force-reﬂection. In IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, pages 390–395 vol.1, 1992.
[20] A. Ma and S. Payandeh.
Analysis and Experimentation of a 4-
DOF Haptic Device. In Symposium on haptic interfaces for virtual
environment and teleoperator systems, pages 351–356, 2008.
[21] T. H. Massie and J. K. Salisbury. The PHANToM haptic interface:
A device for probing virtual objects. In ASME Dynamic Systems and
Control Division, pages 295–301, 1994.
[22] G. Picod, A. Jambon, D. Vinatier, and P. Dubois. What can the operator
actually feel when performing a laparoscopy? Surg Endosc, 19(1):95–
100, 2005.
[23] L. Rifat.
Establishing telemedicine in developing countries: From
inception to implementation. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2004.
[24] T. N. Robinson and G. V. Stiegmann. Minimally Invasive Surgery.
Endoscopy, 36(01):48–51, 2004.
[25] Russel A. Faust.
Robotics in surgery : history, current and future
applications. Nova Science Publishers, New York, 2007.
[26] G. Tholey, J. Desai, and A. Castellanos.
Force Feedback Plays a
Signiﬁcant Role in Minimally Invasive Surgery - Results and Analysis.
Ann Surg, 241(1):102–109, 2005.
[27] D. Tran, F. Podwojewski, P. Beillas, M. Ottenio, D. Voirin, F. Turquier,
and D. Mitton. Abdominal wall muscle elasticity and abdomen local
stiffness on healthy volunteers during various physiological activities.
Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 60:451
– 459, 2016.
[28] M. Yalcin and V. Patoglu. Kinematics and design of AssistOn-SE:
A self-adjusting shoulder-elbow exoskeleton. In IEEE/RAS/EMBS In-
ternational Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics,
pages 1579–1585, 2012.
[29] T. Yang, J. Liu, W. Huang, L. Yang, C. K. Chui, M. H. Ang, Y. Su,
and S. K. Y. Chang.
Frontiers of Intelligent Autonomous Systems,
chapter Mechanism of a Learning Robot Manipulator for Laparoscopic
Surgical Training, pages 297–308. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[30] J. Yoon and J. Ryu.
Design, fabrication, and evaluation of a new
haptic device using a parallel mechanism. IEEE/ASME Transactions
on Mechatronics, 6(3):221–233, 2001.
1112
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
