DOI: 10.1111/cgf.12346
COMPUTER GRAPHICS forum
Volume 33 (2014), number 6 pp. 228–251
A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer
Graphics
Jan Bender1, Matthias M¨uller2, Miguel A. Otaduy3, Matthias Teschner4 and Miles Macklin2
1Graduate School CE, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
bender@gsc.tu-darmstadt.de
2NVIDIA PhysX Research, Zurich, Switzerland
{matthiasm, mmacklin}@nvidia.com
3URJC Madrid, Madrid, Spain
maotaduy@gmail.com
4Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
teschner@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
Abstract
The dynamic simulation of mechanical effects has a long history in computer graphics. The classical methods in this ﬁeld discretize
Newton’s second law in a variety of Lagrangian or Eulerian ways, and formulate forces appropriate for each mechanical effect:
joints for rigid bodies; stretching, shearing or bending for deformable bodies and pressure, or viscosity for ﬂuids, to mention just a
few. In the last years, the class of position-based methods has become popular in the graphics community. These kinds of methods
are fast, stable and controllable which make them well-suited for use in interactive environments. Position-based methods are
not as accurate as force-based methods in general but they provide visual plausibility. Therefore, the main application areas
of these approaches are virtual reality, computer games and special effects in movies. This state-of-the-art report covers the
large variety of position-based methods that were developed in the ﬁeld of physically based simulation. We will introduce the
concept of position-based dynamics, present dynamic simulation based on shape matching and discuss data-driven upsampling
approaches. Furthermore, we will present several applications for these methods.
Keywords: position-based simulation, shape matching, data-driven upsampling, deformable solids, ﬂuids
ACM CCS: I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism Animation
1. Introduction
The simulation of solid objects such as rigid bodies, soft bodies or
cloth has been an important and active research topic in computer
graphics for more than 30 years. The ﬁeld was introduced to graphics
by Terzopoulos and his colleagues in the late 1980s [TPBF87a].
Since then, a large body of work has been published and the list is
growing rapidly. There exists a variety of survey papers [GM97],
[MTV05], [NMK*06], [MSJT08], [BETC12] which document this
development. However, due to the shear number of papers, it has
become difﬁcult to cover the entire ﬁeld in one survey.
In this state-of-the-art report, we focus on a special class of simu-
lation methods, namely position-based approaches. These methods
were originally developed for the simulation of solids. However,
some recent works demonstrated that the position-based concepts
can even be used to simulate ﬂuids. Classical dynamics simula-
tion methods formulate the change of momentum of a system as
a function of applied forces, and evolve positions through numer-
ical integration of accelerations and velocities. Position-based ap-
proaches, instead, compute positions directly, based on the solution
to a quasi-static problem.
Physical simulation is a well-studied problem in the computa-
tional sciences and therefore, many of the well-established methods
have been adopted in graphics such as the ﬁnite element method
(FEM) [OH99], the ﬁnite differences method [TPBF87b], the ﬁnite
volume method [TBHF03], the boundary element method [JP99] or
particle-based approaches [DSB99], [THMG04]. The main goal of
computer simulations in computational physics and chemistry is to
replace real-world experiments and thus, to be as accurate as possi-
ble. In contrast, the main applications of physically based simulation
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
228
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
229
methods in computer graphics are special effects in movies and com-
mercials and more recently, computer games and other interactive
systems. Here, speed and controllability are the most important fac-
tors and all that is required in terms of accuracy is visual plausibility.
This is especially true for real-time applications.
Position-based methods are tailored particularly for use in inter-
active environments. They provide a high level of control and are
stable even when simple and fast explicit time integration schemes
are used. Due to their simplicity, robustness and speed, these ap-
proaches have recently become very popular in computer graphics
and in the game industry.
In this state-of-the-art report, we focus the discussion on several
geometrically motivated methods, in particular those that directly
manipulate the positions of the simulated bodies. We start with
a description of position-based dynamics methods, which compute
equilibrium positions by iteratively resolving geometric constraints.
Then, we cover shape matching methods, and we conclude with
data-driven upsampling methods, which compute positions as a
function of data from pre-captured deformation examples.
Collision detection is an important part of any simulation system.
However, an adequate discussion of this topic is beyond the scope
of this report. Therefore, we refer the reader to the surveys of Lin
and Gottschalk [LG98] and the one of Teschner et al. [TKH*05].
2. Background
The most popular approaches for the simulation of dynamic systems
in computer graphics are force based. Internal and external forces are
accumulated from which accelerations are computed based on New-
ton’s second law of motion. A time integration method is then used
to update the velocities and ﬁnally the positions of the object. A few
simulation methods (most rigid body simulators) use impulse-based
dynamics and directly manipulate velocities. In contrast, geometry-
based methods omit the velocity layer as well and immediately
work on the positions. The main advantage of a position-based
approach is its controllability. Overshooting problems of explicit
integration schemes in force-based systems can be avoided. In ad-
dition, collision constraints can be handled easily and penetrations
can be resolved completely by projecting points to valid locations.
Among the force-based approaches, one of the simplest methods
is to represent and simulate solids with mass-spring networks. A
mass-spring system consists of a set of point masses that are con-
nected by springs. The physics of such a system is straightforward
and a simulator is easy to implement. However, there are some
signiﬁcant drawbacks of the simple method.
r The behaviour of the object depends on the way the spring net-
work is set up.
r It can be difﬁcult to tune the spring constants to get the desired
behaviour.
r Mass-spring networks cannot capture volumetric effects directly
such as volume conservation or prevention of volume inversions.
The FEM solves all of the above problems because it considers the
entire volume of a solid instead of replacing it with a ﬁnite number of
point masses. Here, the object is discretized by splitting the volume
into a number of elements with ﬁnite size. This discretization yields
a mesh as in the mass-spring approach in which the vertices play the
role of the mass points and the elements, typically tetrahedra, can
be viewed as generalized springs acting on multiple points at the
same time. In both cases, forces at the mass points or mesh vertices
are computed due to their velocities and the actual deformation of
the mesh.
3. Position-Based Dynamics
In this section, we present position-based dynamics, an approach
which omits the velocity and acceleration layer and immediately
works on the positions [MHHR07]. We will ﬁrst describe the ba-
sic idea and the simulation algorithm of position-based dynamics
(PBD). Then, we will focus speciﬁcally on how to solve the system
of constraints that describe the object to be simulated. After this, we
will provide a list of constraints that can be used to simulate a variety
of materials such as soft bodies, cloth or even ﬂuids with PBD. We
will also discuss the relation of PBD to strain limiting methods, how
to include damping and ways to parallelize the simulation algorithm.
3.1. Overview
The objects to be simulated are represented by a set of N particles
and a set of M constraints. Each particle i has three attributes,
namely
mi
Mass
xi
Position
vi
Velocity
A constraint j is deﬁned by the ﬁve attributes
nj
Cardinality
Cj : R3nj →R
Scalar constraint function
{i1, . . . inj }, ik ∈[1, . . . N]
Set of indices
kj ∈[0 . . . 1]
Stiffness parameter
unilateral or bilateral
Type
Constraint j with type bilateral is satisﬁed if Cj(xi1, . . . , xinj ) =
0. If its type is unilateral then it is satisﬁed if Cj(xi1, . . . , xinj ) ≥0.
The stiffness parameter kj deﬁnes the strength of the constraint in a
range from zero to one.
Algorithm 1 Position-based dynamics
1: for all vertices i do
2:
initialize xi = x0
i , vi = v0
i , wi = 1/mi
3: end for
4: loop
5:
for all vertices i do vi ←vi +Δtwifext(xi)
6:
for all vertices i do pi ←xi +Δtvi
7:
for all vertices i do genCollConstraints(xi →pi)
8:
loop solverIteration times
9:
projectConstraints(C1,...,CM+MColl,p1,...,pN)
10:
end loop
11:
for all vertices i do
12:
vi ←(pi −xi)/Δt
13:
xi ←pi
14:
end for
15:
velocityUpdate(v1,...,vN)
16: end loop
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
230
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Given these data and a time step t, the simulation proceeds as
described by Algorithm 1. Since the algorithm simulates a system
which is second order in time, both the positions and the velocities
of the particles need to be speciﬁed in (1)–(3) before the simulation
loop starts. Lines (5)–(6) perform a simple explicit forward Euler in-
tegration step on the velocities and the positions. The new locations
pi are not assigned to the positions directly but are only used as pre-
dictions. Non-permanent external constraints such as collision con-
straints are generated at the beginning of each time step from scratch
in line (7). Here, the original and the predicted positions are used in
order to perform continuous collision detection. The solver (8)–(10)
then iteratively corrects the predicted positions such that they satisfy
the MColl external as well as the M internal constraints. Finally, the
corrected positions pi are used to update the positions and the veloc-
ities. It is essential here to update the velocities along with the posi-
tions. If this is not done, the simulation does not produce the correct
behaviour of a second-order system. As you can see, the integration
scheme used here is very similar to the Verlet method. It is also
closely related to Jos Stam’s Nucleus solver [Sta09] which also uses
a set of constraints to describe the objects to be simulated. The main
difference is that Nucleus solves the constraints for velocities, not
positions.
3.2. The System to be Solved
The goal of the solver steps (8)–(10) is to correct the predicted
positions pi of the particles such that they satisfy all constraints.
The problem that needs to be solved comprises of a set of M equa-
tions for the 3N unknown position components, where M is now
the total number of constraints. This system does not need to be
symmetric. If M > 3N (M < 3N) the system is overdetermined
(underdetermined). In addition to the asymmetry, the equations
are in general non-linear. The function of a simple distance con-
straint C(p1, p2) = |p1 −p2|2 −d2 yields a non-linear equation.
What complicates things even further is the fact that collisions pro-
duce inequalities rather than equalities. Solving a non-symmetric,
non-linear system with equalities and inequalities is a tough
problem.
Let p be the concatenation [pT
1, . . . , pT
N]T and let all the constraint
functions Cj take the concatenated vector p as input while only using
the subset of coordinates they are deﬁned for. We can now write the
system to be solved as
C1(p) ≻0
. . .
CM(p) ≻0,
where the symbol ≻denotes either = or ≥. Newton–Raphson it-
eration is a method to solve non-linear symmetric systems with
equalities only. The process starts with a ﬁrst guess of a solution.
Each constraint function is then linearized in the neighbourhood of
the current solution using
C(p + p) = C(p) + ∇pC(p) · p + O(|p|2) = 0.
This yields a linear system for the global correction vector p
∇pC1(p) · p = −C1(p)
. . .
∇pCM(p) · p = −CM(p),
where ∇pCj(p) is the 1 × N dimensional vector containing the
derivatives of the function Cj with respect to all its parameters,
i.e. the N components of p. It is also the jth row of the linear
system. Both, the rows ∇pCj(p) and the right-hand side scalars
−Cj(p) are constant because they are evaluated at the location p
before the system is solved. When M = 3N and only equalities are
present, the system can be solved by any linear solver, e.g. a pre-
conditioned conjugate gradient method. Once it is solved for p the
current solution is updated as p ←p + p. A new linear system is
generated by evaluating ∇pCj(p) and −Cj(p) at the new location
after which the process repeats.
If M ̸= 3N the resulting matrix of the linear system is non-
symmetric and not invertible. Goldenthal et al. [GHF*07] solve this
problem by using the pseudo-inverse of the system matrix which
yields the best solution in the least-squares sense. Still, handling
inequalities is not possible directly.
3.3. The Non-Linear Gauss–Seidel Solver
In the position-based dynamics approach, non-linear Gauss–Seidel
is used. It solves each constraint equation separately. Each con-
straint yields a single scalar equation C(p) ≻0 for all the particle
positions associated with it. The subsystem is therefore highly un-
derdetermined. PBD solves this problem as follows. Again, given
p we want to ﬁnd a correction p such that C(p + p) ≻0. It is
important to notice that PBD also linearizes the constraint func-
tion but individually for each constraint. The constraint equation is
approximated by
C(p + p) ≈C(p) + ∇pC(p) · p ≻0.
(1)
The problem of the system being underdetermined is solved by
restricting p to be in the direction of ∇pC which conserves the
linear and angular momenta. This means that only one scalar λ—a
Lagrange multiplier—has to be found such that the correction
p = λ∇pC(p)
solves Equation (1). This yields the following formula for the cor-
rection vector of a single particle i
pi = −s wi∇piC(p),
(2)
where
s =
C(p)

j wj|∇pj C(p)|2
(3)
and wi = 1/mi.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
231
As mentioned above, this solver linearizes the constraint func-
tions. However, in contrast to the Newton–Raphson method, the
linearization happens individually per constraint. Solving the lin-
earized constraint function of a single distance constraint for in-
stance yields the correct result in a single step. Because the positions
are immediately updated after a constraint is processed, these up-
dates will inﬂuence the linearization of the next constraint because
the linearization depends on the actual positions. Asymmetry does
not pose a problem because each constraint produces one scalar
equation for one unknown Lagrange multiplier λ. Inequalities are
handled trivially by ﬁrst checking whether C(p) ≥0. If this is the
case, the constraint is simply skipped.
The fact that each constraint is linearized individually before its
projection makes the solver more stable than a global approach in
which the linearizations are kept ﬁxed for the entire global solve
of a Newton iteration. Liu et al. [LBOK13] pointed out that PBD
can be interpreted as a heuristic variant of the variational implicit
Euler method taking the inertial term out of the solver and into the
integration step of the simulation.
We have not considered the stiffness k of the constraint so far.
There are several ways to incorporate it. The simplest variant is to
multiply the corrections p by k ∈[0 . . . 1]. However, for multi-
ple iteration loops of the solver, the effect of k is non-linear. The
remaining error for a single distance constraint after ns solver it-
erations is p(1 −k)ns. To get a linear relationship, we multiply
the corrections not by k directly but by k′ = 1 −(1 −k)1/ns. With
this transformation, the error becomes p(1 −k′)ns = p(1 −k)
and, thus, becomes linearly dependent on k and independent of ns
as desired. However, the resulting material stiffness is still depen-
dent on the time step of the simulation. Real-time environments
typically use ﬁxed time steps in which case this dependency is not
problematic.
3.4. Constraint Examples
In the following, we will introduce different constraint examples.
For better readability, we deﬁne pi,j = pi −pj.
3.4.1. Stretching
To give an example, let us consider the distance constraint function
C(p1, p2) = |p1,2| −d. The derivatives with respect to the points
are ∇p1C(p1, p2) = n and ∇p2C(p1, p2) = −n with n =
p1,2
|p1,2|. The
scaling factor s is, thus, s = |p1,2|−d
1+1
and the ﬁnal corrections
p1 = −
w1
w1+w2 (|p1,2| −d) p1,2
|p1,2|
p2 = +
w2
w1+w2 (|p1,2| −d) p1,2
|p1,2|,
which are the formulas proposed in [Jak01] for the projection of
distance constraints (see Figure 1). They pop up as a special case of
the general constraint projection method.
3.4.2. Bending
In cloth simulation, it is important to simulate bending in addition to
stretching resistance. To this end, for each pair of adjacent triangles
Figure 1: Projection of the constraint C(p1, p2) = |p1,2| −d. The
corrections pi are weighted according to the inverse masses wi =
1/mi.
Figure
2: For
bending
resistance,
the
constraint
function
C(p1, p2, p3, p4) = arccos(n1 · n2) −ϕ0 is used. The actual dihe-
dral angle ϕ is measured as the angle between the normals of the
two triangles.
Figure 3: Constraint function C(q, p1, p2, p3) = (q −p1) · n −h
makes sure that q stays above the triangle p1, p2, p3 by the cloth
thickness h.
(p1, p3, p2) and (p1, p2, p4) a bilateral bending constraint is added
with constraint function
Cbend(p1, p2, p3, p4) =
acos
 p2,1 × p3,1
|p2,1 × p3,1| · p2,1 × p4,1
|p2,1 × p4,1|

−ϕ0
and stiffness kbend. The scalar ϕ0 is the initial dihedral angle between
the two triangles and kbend is a global user parameter deﬁning the
bending stiffness of the cloth (see Figure 2). The advantage of this
bending term over adding a distance constraint between points p3
and p4 is that it is independent of stretching. This is because the term
is independent of edge lengths. In Figure 4 we show how bending
and stretching resistance can be tuned independently.
3.4.3. Triangle collisions
Self-collisions within cloth can be handled by additional unilateral
constraints. For vertex q moving through a triangle p1, p2, p3, the
constraint function reads
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
232
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Figure 4: The image shows a mesh that is simulated using stretching and bending constraints. The top row shows (kstretching, kbending) = (1, 1),
( 1
2, 1) and ( 1
100, 1). The bottom row shows (kstretching, kbending) = (1, 0), ( 1
2, 0) and ( 1
100, 0).
C(q, p1, p2, p3) = (q −p1) · p2,1 × p3,1
|p2,1 × p3,1| −h,
where h is the cloth thickness (see Figure 3). If the vertex enters from
below with respect to the triangle normal, the constraint function
has to be
C(q, p1, p2, p3) = (q −p1) · p3,1 × p2,1
|p3,1 × p2,1| −h.
3.4.4. Volume conservation
For tetrahedral meshes, it is useful to have a constraint that conserves
the volume of single tetrahedron. Such a constraint has the form
C(p1, p2, p3, p4) = 1
6

p2,1 × p3,1

· p4,1 −V0,
where p1, p2, p3 and p4 are the four corners of the tetrahedron and
V0 is its rest volume. In a similar way, the area of a triangle can be
kept constant by introducing
C(p1, p2, p3) = 1
2
p2,1 × p3,1
 −A0.
Figure 5: Simulation of overpressure inside a character.
3.4.5. Cloth balloons
For closed triangle meshes, overpressure inside the mesh as shown
in Figure 5 can easily be modelled with an equality constraint con-
cerning all N vertices of the mesh:
C(p1, . . . , pN) =
ntriangles
	
i=1
(pti
1 × pti
2) · pti
3

−kpressureV0.
Here, ti
1, ti
2 and ti
3 are the three indices of the vertices belonging to
triangle i. The sum computes the actual volume of the closed mesh.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
233
It is compared against the original volume V0 times the overpressure
factor kpressure. This constraint function yields the gradients
∇piC =
	
j:tj
1 =i
(ptj
2 × ptj
3 ) +
	
j:tj
2 =i
(ptj
3 × ptj
1 ) +
	
j:tj
3 =i
(ptj
1 × ptj
2 ).
These gradients have to be scaled by the scaling factor given in
Equation (3) and weighted by the masses according to Equation (2)
to get the ﬁnal projection offsets pi.
3.4.6. Fluids
It is also possible to simulate ﬂuids in the PBD framework even
though it has been used almost exclusively for the simulation of
deformable objects. We mention ﬂuids simply as an item in the list
of possible constraints because all that is needed to simulate liquids
and gases is a specialized constraint.
A straightforward approach would be to model the ﬂuid as a sys-
tem of particles constrained to maintain a minimum distance from
each other, however this leads to granular-like behaviour and will
typically fail to reach hydrostatic equilibrium when coming to rest.
An alternative method is presented by Macklin and M¨uller [MM13]
where ﬂuid incompressibility is enforced using density constraints.
Borrowing the concept of a density estimator from smoothed parti-
cle hydrodynamics (SPH) [Mon94, Mon92], a density constraint is
constructed for each particle i in the system as follows:
Ci(p1, ..., pn) = ρi
ρ0
−1,
(4)
where ρ0 is the ﬂuid rest density and ρi is the density at a parti-
cle, deﬁned as the sum of smooth kernels [MCG03] centred at the
particle’s neighbour positions
ρi =
	
j
mjW(pi −pj, h).
Note that here each particle’s mass is assumed to be one, and the
rest density adjusted accordingly. In order to solve these density
constraints using position-based dynamics, the derivative of the
constraint function (4) with respect to each particle’s position is
required. This can be calculated using the gradient of SPH kernels
∇pkCi = 1
ρ0
 
j
∇pkW(pi −pj, h) if k = i
−∇pkW(pi −pj, h) if k = j.
Then, by taking advantage of symmetry in the SPH smoothing
kernel W, the corrective change in position due to the particle’s own
density constraint, and the density constraints of its neighbours is
given by
pi = 1
ρ0
	
j

λi + λj

∇W(pi −pj, h),
where λ is the per-constraint scaling factor (see Section 3.3).
Figure 6 shows a real-time water simulation using this method.
Figure 6: A wave pool scene consisting of 128K ﬂuid particles
simulated in 10 ms/frame on the GPU. Incompressibility is enforced
using density constraints solved using position-based dynamics.
3.5. Strain Limiting
Strain limiting is an important topic in the ﬁeld of cloth simulation.
The reason is that the low solver iteration counts used in real-time
applications yield stretchy cloth. Since most cloth types are per-
ceived by the human eye as completely inextensible, it is important
to make simulated cloth inextensible in order to avoid disturbing
visual artefacts [GHF*07, BB08].
A strain limiting method makes sure that the overall stretch of
the cloth stays below a certain threshold. In force-based simulations,
strain limiting is a separate pass which is executed before or after the
regular cloth solver. In most cases, this pass moves the positions of
vertices directly, even in force-based simulations. Therefore, most
strain limiting methods fall under the category of position-based
methods.
A straightforward way of limiting strain is to iterate through all
edges of a cloth mesh and project the adjacent particles of over-
stretched edges as shown in Figure 1 so that the stretch of the edge
does not exceed the stretch limit. Provot [Pro95] was among the ﬁrst
to use this method in the context of cloth simulation. He performs
a single iteration through all cloth edges after a force-based solver.
Desbrun et al. [DSB99] and Bridson et al. [BMF03] later used the
same post-solver strain limiter but with multiple iterations through
all edges. Due to its simplicity, this method is still one of the most
popular strain limiting methods used in cloth simulations .
The method is very similar to position-based cloth simulation. The
main difference is that the strain limiting pass described above does
not inﬂuence the velocities. These are updated by the force-based
solver. In contrast, position-based cloth simulation derives the new
velocities from the projections, making an additional solver pass
obsolete. Therefore, every position-based strain limiting method
used in force-based simulations can directly be used in a PBD solver.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
234
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Figure 7: The Long-Range Attachments (LRA) method used to sim-
ulate an inextensible rope attached at one end. Each particle is
constrained or remain inside a sphere centred at the attachment
point (red) whose radius is the initial distance from the particle to
the attachment. For each conﬁguration, target positions are shown
in green when particles need to be projected. Particles inside the
constraint spheres are allowed to move freely.
The result of projecting along edges depends on the structure of
the mesh. To reduce this artefact, Wang et al. [WOR10] propose to
limit the principal strains of the 2D deformation ﬁeld within each
triangle. The 2D deformation ﬁeld can be determined by considering
the 2D coordinates of the vertices of a triangle within the planes
of the rest and current triangle conﬁgurations. Wang et al. compute
the principal strains of the 2D deformation gradient, clamp them
and construct a new 2D transformation using the clamped strains.
With this new transformation, they correct the current positions of
the triangle vertices. As before, to limit strain globally, they iterate
through all triangles multiple times in a Gauss–Seidel fashion.
Due to the relatively slow convergence rate of a Gauss–Seidel
solver, high iteration counts are necessary to limit the strain globally
which slows down the simulation. The two main methods to improve
the convergence rate are the use of a global Newton–Raphson solver
as proposed by Goldenthal et al. [GHF*07] or to perform Gauss–
Seidel iterations on a hierarchy of meshes as proposed in [M¨ul08],
[WOR10] and [SKBK13]. However, these methods complicate the
implementation and even though their convergence rate is higher, a
single iteration can be signiﬁcantly more expensive than a simple
Gauss–Seidel iteration.
Recently, Kim et al. [KCM12] found a surprisingly simple and
robust technique they call Long-Range Attachments (LRA) to pre-
vent cloth from getting stretched globally with low iteration counts.
Their method exploits the fact that stretching artefacts almost always
appear when cloth is attached. In this case, instead of only applying
attachment constraints to the subset of the vertices near the region
where the cloth is attached and relying on error propagation of the
solver for all other vertices, they apply unilateral attachment con-
straints to all the vertices by attaching each vertex to one or more
attachment point directly. The rest lengths of these LRA can either
be set to the Euclidian distance in the rest state or via measuring
geodesic lengths along the cloth. Figure 7 demonstrates the method
Figure 8: Simulation of a piece of cloth with 90K vertices at 20 fps
on a GPU using LRA.
on a single rope attached at one end. The method allows the sim-
ulation of a piece of cloth with 90K vertices at interactive rates as
shown in Figure 8.
A similar approach was recently proposed by M¨uller et al.
[MKC12] to guarantee zero stretch in a single pass for the case
of attached ropes. This approach allows the simulation of thousands
of hair strands in real time (Figure 9). Figure 10 visualizes the basic
idea. Particle x1 is attached. To satisfy the ﬁrst distance constraint,
particle x2 is moved towards x1 such that their mutual distance is l0.
Particle x3 is then moved towards the new position of x2 and similarly
along the chain until the last particle is reached. After this single
pass, all the distance constraints are satisﬁed. This method is called
Follow The Leader (FTL). While LRA guarantees zero stretch of
all the particles with respect to the attachment points, the constraint
between consecutive particles can still remain overstretched. On the
other hand, in contrast to LRA which is momentum conserving,
FTL introduces unphysical behaviour. Not projecting distance con-
straints symmetrically means that a system is simulated for which
each particle has inﬁnitely more mass than its successor. To com-
pensate for this behaviour, the authors replace the PBD velocity
update vi ←(pi −xi)/t by
vi ←pi −xi
t
+ sdamping
−di+1
t
,
where di+1 is the position correction applied to particle i + 1 and
sdamping ∈[0, 1] a scaling factor do inﬂuence damping. While this
modiﬁcation of DFTL (dynamic FTL) hides the unphysical be-
haviour of FTL, it introduces a certain amount of damping which is
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
235
Figure 9: Dynamic FTL allows the simulation of every hair strand in real time. From left to right: 47K hair strands simulated at 25 fps
including rendering and hair–hair repulsion. Long hair composed of 1.9-m particles at 8 fps. Curly hair using visualization post-processing.
l0
l0
l0
1
x
2
x
3
x
4
x
Figure 10: Follow The Leader (FTL) projection. Starting from the
attachment down, each particle is moved directly towards its prede-
cessor such that their mutual distance constraint is satisﬁed.
acceptable for the simulation of hair and fur as the author’s results
show.
3.6. Wrinkle Meshes
In cloth simulations, reducing the mesh resolution not only reduces
the cost of a single solver iteration but also the number of iterations
required to get visually pleasing results. In [MC10], the authors
proposed a way to reduce the resolution of the dynamic mesh with-
out losing too much visual detail. The most signiﬁcant detail in
cloth simulations are small wrinkles. The method is based on the
observation that global dynamic behaviour of the cloth and wrinkle
formation can be separated. Therefore, expensive dynamic simula-
tion including collision handling is performed on a low-resolution
mesh. The wrinkle formation is handled on a high-resolution mesh
that is attached to the dynamic mesh (see Figures 11 and 12). Since
wrinkles do not oscillate, it is sufﬁcient to use a static solver with a
low iteration count on the high-resolution mesh.
Figure 13 shows the constraints deﬁned on the high-resolution
mesh to make it form wrinkles and follow the dynamic mesh. The
Figure 11: Basic idea of wrinkle meshes. The high resolution wrin-
kle mesh (white vertices) follows the low-resolution dynamic mesh
(black vertices) by restricting the white vertices to remain within a
certain distance (grey discs) to the dynamic mesh.
Figure 12: Visualization of the wrinkle mesh (solid) and the under-
lying dynamic mesh (wireframe).
attachment constraints makes sure that the vertices of the wrinkle
mesh stay close to their attachment points on the dynamic mesh.
If the dynamic mesh has outside/inside information, a one-sided
constraint can be used which makes sure that the wrinkle vertices
stay on the outside of the dynamic mesh, thus avoiding penetra-
tions with other objects. The stretching and bending constraints are
responsible for wrinkle formation.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
236
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
p
a
1
p
2
p
0l
n
a
p
1
p
2
p
3
p
4
p
Figure 13: Static constraints on a wrinkle mesh: Attachment con-
straint (top left), one-sided attachment constraint (top right), stretch
constraint (bottom left) and bending constraint (bottom right).
3.7. Damping
The quality of dynamic simulations can generally be improved by
the incorporation of an appropriate damping scheme. As a positive
effect, damping can improve the stability by reducing temporal
oscillations of the point positions of an object. This enables the use
of larger time steps which increases the performance of a dynamic
simulation. On the other hand, damping changes the dynamic motion
of the simulated objects. The resulting effects can be either desired,
e.g. reduced oscillations of a deformable solid, or disturbing, e.g.
changes of the linear or angular momentum of the entire object.
Generally, a damping term C ˙X can be incorporated into the mo-
tion equation of an object where ˙X denotes the vector of all ﬁrst
time derivatives of positions. If the user-deﬁned matrix C is diago-
nal, absolute velocities of the points are damped, which sometimes
is referred to as point damping. If appropriately computed, such
point damping forces result in an improved numerical stability by
reducing the acceleration of a point. Such characteristics are de-
sired in some settings, e.g. in the context of friction. In the general
case, however, the overall slow-down of an object, caused by point
damping forces, is not desired. Point damping forces are, e.g. used
in [TF88] or in [PB88], where point damping is used for dynamic
simulations with geometric constraints such as point-to-nail.
In order to preserve linear and angular momentum of deformable
objects, symmetric damping forces, usually referred to as spring
damping forces, can be used. Such forces can be represented by
non-diagonal entries in the matrix C. Damping forces are, e.g. de-
scribed by Baraff and Witkin [BW98] or Nealen et al. [NMK*06].
These forces can also be applied to position-based methods. How-
ever, as the approaches of Baraff and Witkin and Nealen et al. rely
on topological information of the object geometry, they cannot be
applied to meshless techniques such as shape matching.
Point and spring damping can be used to reduce current velocities
or relative velocities. However, it is generally more appropriate to
consider predicted velocities or relative velocities for the next time
step.
An
interesting
damping
alternative
has
been
presented
in [SGT09]. Here, the idea of symmetric, momentum-conserving
forces is extended to meshless representations. Global symmetric
damping forces are computed with respect to the centre of mass of an
object. While such forces conserve the linear momentum, the preser-
vation of the angular momentum is guaranteed by force projection
onto relative positions or by torque elimination using Linear Pro-
gramming. The approach presented in [SGT09] iteratively computes
damping forces. The paper, however, also shows the convergence of
the iterative process and how the solution can be computed directly
without performing iterations. Therefore, the approach is an efﬁcient
alternative to compute damping forces for arbitrary position-based
deformation models with or without connectivity information. The
approach can be used to damp oscillations globally or locally for
user-deﬁned clusters.
3.8. Parallelization
Parallelization of the PBD approach is an important topic since
multi-core systems and massively parallel GPUs are ubiquitous to-
day.
In a single CPU implementation, the solver processes the con-
straints one by one in a Gauss–Seidel-type fashion. Thereby, after
each constraint projection, the positions of affected particles are im-
mediately updated. In a parallel implementation, the constraints are
processed in parallel by multiple threads. If two constraints affecting
the same particle are handled by two different threads simultane-
ously, they are not allowed to immediately update the particle’s
position because writing to the same position simultaneously leads
to race conditions making the process unpredictable. A solution to
circumvent this problem is to use atomic operations. Such opera-
tions are guaranteed not to be interrupted. However, atomics can
slow down parallel execution signiﬁcantly.
To avoid these issues, a parallel implementation of PBD needs
to split the constraints into groups or phases. In each phase, none
of the constraints are allowed to share a common particle. With
this restriction, the constraints in the ﬁrst phase can be processed
in parallel without conﬂicts. Then, after a global synchronization,
the next phase can be processed. This cycle is repeated until all
constraints are processed.
As an example, if N particles are connected in a serial chain, the
constraints 1–2, 3–4, 5–6, 7–8, ... can be processed in phase 1 and
the constraints 2–3,4–5,6–7, ... in phase 2. This speciﬁc example
corresponds to the Red–Black Gauss Seidel scheme, where there
are two sets (colours) of constraints. For more general types of
constraint such as the stretch, shear and bending constraints of cloth,
more phases are needed. In this general case, splitting constraints
into phases corresponds to the graph colouring problem, where each
constraint corresponds to a node of the graph and two constraints are
connected by an edge if they affect one or more common particles.
The minimum number of colours determines how many phases are
needed in the parallel execution of PBD. Keeping the number of
phases small is not the only optimization criterion. The sets also
need to have similar sizes for good load balancing.
3.9. Discussion
Position-based dynamics is fast, easy to implement and controllable.
Furthermore, it avoids the overshooting problems of force-based
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
237
Figure 14: Robust and volume-conserving deformations using shape matching. Armadillos (32 442 particles total), 20 ducks and 20 tori
(21 280 particles total) and 20 balls (7640 particles total) were simulated in real-time on a GPU.
simulation models when using an explicit time integration scheme.
The method can handle arbitrary bilateral and unilateral constraints
as long as the gradient of the constraint function can be determined.
Therefore, this method is very ﬂexible and has already been used to
simulate cloth, deformable solids and ﬂuids.
However, position-based dynamics also has some disadvantages.
The stiffness of the model does not only depend on the user-
deﬁned stiffness parameter but also on the time step size and the
number of solver iterations. Although the dependency can be re-
duced as described in Section 3.3, it cannot be completely removed.
Therefore, it is difﬁcult to adjust parameters independently. De-
coupling these parameters as well as adaptive time stepping are
open problems and important topics for future work. Another draw-
back is that position-based dynamics is not convergent, i.e. the
simulation does not converge to a certain solution with mesh re-
ﬁnement. Hence, the usage of adaptive meshes is another open
problem.
4. Shape Matching
The geometrically motivated concept of shape matching to simulate
deformable objects was introduced by M¨uller et al. [MHTG05].
Shape matching is a meshless approach which is able to simulate
visually plausible elastic and plastic deformations (see Figure 14).
This approach is easy to implement, very efﬁcient and uncondition-
ally stable.
The basic idea of simulating elastic behaviour with shape match-
ing is shown in Figure 15. For the simulation, the initial conﬁgura-
tion of the deformable object must be stored. Since no connectivity
information is needed, this conﬁguration is deﬁned by the initial
positions ¯xi. In each time step, the positions and velocities of the
particles are updated without considering any internal constraints
between the particles. Only external forces and collision response
are taken into account. Instead of using internal constraints, goal
positions are determined by matching the initial shape with the de-
formed conﬁguration. Then, each particle is pulled towards its goal
position.
In the following, we ﬁrst describe how the goal positions are
determined. Then we show how large deformations can be simulated
x1
x2
x3
x0
x1
x2
x3
x0
g0
g1
g2
g3
R, c
Figure 15: The initial shape with the vertex positions ¯xi is matched
to the deformed conﬁguration xi to obtain goal positions gi. The
deformed shape is pulled towards these goal positions to simulate
elastic behaviour.
using region-based shape matching and introduce fast summation
techniques for this approach. In the end, the concept of oriented
particles and different extensions of the shape matching method are
presented.
4.1. Goal Positions
In order to obtain goal positions for the deformed shape, the best
rigid transformation is determined which matches the set of initial
positions ¯x and the set of deformed positions x. The corresponding
rotation matrix R and the translational vectors c and ¯c are determined
by minimizing
	
i
wi (R (¯xi −¯c) + c −xi)2 ,
where wi are the weights of the individual points. The optimal
translation vectors are given by the centre of mass of the initial
shape and the centre of mass of the deformed shape:
¯c = 1
M
	
i
mi ¯xi,
c = 1
M
	
i
mixi,
M =
	
i
mi.
(5)
If we minimize the term 
i(A¯ri −ri)2 with ri = xi −c
and ¯ri = ¯xi −¯c, we get the optimal linear transformation A
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
238
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
of the initial and the deformed shape. This transformation is
determined by
A =
	
i
miri ¯rT
i

 	
i
mi ¯ri ¯rT
i

−1
= ArAs.
(6)
In our case, we are only interested in the rotational part of this trans-
formation. Since As is symmetric, it contains no rotation. Therefore,
we only need to extract the rotational part of Ar to get the optimal
rotation R for shape matching. This can be done by a polar de-
composition Ar = RS of the transformation matrix where S is a
symmetric matrix.
Finally, the goal positions are determined by
gi = T
 ¯xi
1

,
where T =
 R (c −R¯c) 
. These goal positions are used to compute
position corrections:
xi = α (gi(t) −xi(t)) ,
where α ∈[0, 1] is a user-deﬁned stiffness parameter which deﬁnes
how far the particles are pulled to their goal positions.
Shape matching can be seen as a form of constraint projection
which can directly be integrated in the position-based dynamics
algorithm. By performing shape matching in line (9) of Algorithm 1,
it can be easily combined with other position-based constraint.
4.2. Region-Based Shape Matching
The shape matching algorithm described above allows only for
small deviations from the initial shape. For the simulation of large
deformations, the concept of region-based shape matching became
popular, see, e.g. [MHTG05, RJ07, DBB11]. The idea is to perform
shape matching on several overlapping regions of the original shape.
In each region, we can have a small deviation from the corresponding
part of the initial shape which results in a large deformation over all
regions.
Diziol et al. [DBB11] propose to deﬁne a region for each parti-
cle of the model where the ith region contains all particles in the
ω-ring of the ith particle in the original mesh of the model. Shape
matching is a meshless method but Diziol et al. require a mesh to
deﬁne the shape matching regions. Rivers and James [RJ07] use a
regular lattice instead to deﬁne their regions. No matter which kind
of regions are used, the stiffness of the model depends on the size
of the overlapping regions (see Figure 16). Enlarging the regions
results in a more global shape matching and therefore the stiffness
of the simulated model is increased.
In region-based shape matching, a particle is part of multiple
regions. In the following, we denote the set of regions to which a
particle i belongs by ℜi. Since particles can belong to more than
one region, Rivers and James [RJ07] proposed to use modiﬁed
particle masses ˜mi = mi/|ℜi| for shape matching. This ensures that
a particle which is part of many regions has not more inﬂuence than
Figure 16: The stiffness of the model depends on the region size.
Smaller regions (top) allow larger deformations than larger regions
(bottom). The hexagons in the left images represent the overlapping
regions of the model. The right images show the goal positions after
one particle is moved away.
others. The optimal translation vectors for a region i are determined
by
¯ci = 1
˜Mi
	
j∈ℜi
˜mj ¯xj,
ci = 1
˜Mi
	
j∈ℜi
˜mjxj,
(7)
where ˜Mi = 
j∈ℜi ˜mj is the effective region mass which can be pre-
computed. The optimal rotation matrix R is computed by extracting
the rotational part of the following matrix:
Ar,i =
	
j∈ℜi
˜mjxj ¯xT
j −˜Mici ¯cT
i .
(8)
In this form, the ﬁrst term depends on the particles j of the region
while the second term depends on the region i. This isolation of the
dependencies is required for fast summation techniques (see below).
After performing shape matching for all regions, we get multiple
goal positions for each particle. The ﬁnal goal position for a particle
is determined by blending the goal positions of the corresponding
regions:
gi =
1
|ℜi|
	
j∈ℜi
Tj
 ¯xi
1

.
4.3. Fast Summation Techniques
In the case of region-based shape matching, the stiffness in-
creases with growing region size ω. However, at the same time the
computation of the optimal translation c and the transformation ma-
trix Ar becomes a bottleneck since large sums have to be computed
for each region. For a mesh with the dimension d and n regions,
O(ωdn) operations are required with the naive approach.
4.3.1. Regular lattices
Rivers and James demonstrated in [RJ07] how the number of oper-
ations for computing the sums can be reduced to O(n) for regular
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
239
lattices (d = 3). Their optimization is closely related to the concept
of summed-area tables [Cro84]. In their approach, they compute
the summation for a set of particles just once and reuse it for all
regions that contain this set. This reduces redundant computations
signiﬁcantly for a system with large overlapping regions. The fast
summation of Rivers and James is based on the usage of cubical re-
gions. These cubical regions can be subdivided in 2D plate regions
which can again be subdivided in one-dimensional bar regions. The
region summation is performed in three passes. In the ﬁrst pass,
the sum for each bar is determined. The results are used to compute
the sums for the plates which are again used to obtain the ﬁnal re-
gion sum. Each pass requires O(ω) operations. However, the region
sum can even be determined in constant time if we take into account
that the sum of two neighbouring bars, plates or cubes only differs
by one element. Lattice shape matching can be performed in linear
time if the sums in Equations (7) and (8) are evaluated using the fast
summation technique described above.
The FastLSM method of Rivers and James has several limita-
tions. To handle regions where the lattice is not regular, e.g. on the
boundary, several sums are deﬁned in a pre-processing step for the
corresponding node. In the case of fracturing, the deﬁnition of
these sums must be performed at runtime which is expensive to
compute. Small features need a ﬁne sampling to obtain realistic
results. Since a regular lattice is used, a ﬁne sampling yields an
explosion of the computational costs. FastLSM does not support a
varying region size to simulate inhomogeneous material.
4.3.2. Adaptive lattices
Steinemann et al. [SOG08] introduce an adaptive shape matching
method, which is based on lattice shape matching to overcome
these limitations. A fast summation is realized by an octree-based
sampling and an interval-based deﬁnition of the shape matching re-
gions. The hierarchical simulation model is created by starting with
a coarse cubic lattice and then performing an octree subdivision. The
subdivision process can be controlled by a user-deﬁned criterion.
At the end of the process, a simulation node is placed at the centre
of each leaf cell and a virtual node at the centre of each non-leaf
cell. A virtual node stores the sum of all its descendant simulation
nodes.
The fast summation for the hierarchical model is performed by an
interval-based method which requires O(1) operations per region.
For each simulation node ni, a shape matching region is deﬁned by a
region width ωi. To perform a fast summation, all summation nodes
of the region i are determined in a pre-processing step. First, for
each node nj of the octree the interval of minimum and maximum
distances of all descendant leaves of nj to ni are determined. Then,
during a top–down traversal each node nj where the maximum
distance is smaller than the region width is added to region i. If
the descendant leaf nodes are contained only partially in region i,
the current node must be reﬁned. Only in this case the traversal
continues.
The top–down traversal assigns O(1) summation nodes to each
region. A fast summation can now be performed in two steps. In the
ﬁrst step, the sums of all nodes in the hierarchy are determined. This
is done by ﬁrst computing the sums for the simulation nodes which
P0
P1
P2
P3
P4
−
x0+x1+x2
−
x1+x2+x3
Path P0 sum
in regions
x0+x1
x0
x0+x1+x2+x3
x0+x1+x2
0
Preﬁx sum P0
x0
x1
x2
x3
Figure 17: Fast summation technique for arbitrary triangle
meshes [DBB11]. First, the preﬁx sums for the disjoint paths are de-
termined. Then the region sum is computed by adding the difference
of the intersection interval for each path.
are the leaf nodes of the hierarchy, and then updating the sums of
the virtual nodes in a bottom–up fashion. The second step sums up
the values of the summation nodes for each region. For a roughly
balanced octree, the computation of the sums takes O(n) time where
n is the number of simulation nodes. Hence, the adaptive shape
matching method requires linear time when using the described fast
summation technique to evaluate Equations (7) and (8).
4.3.3. Triangle meshes
In contrast to Rivers and James, Diziol et al. [DBB11] only use
the surface mesh of a volumetric model to simulate its deforma-
tion. Therefore, no interior elements are required for the simulation
which reduces the computational costs. Diziol et al. introduce a fast
summation technique for arbitrary triangle meshes (d = 2) to com-
pute the large sums of the region-based approach efﬁciently. This
technique only requires O(ωn) operations instead of O(ω2n) and
can be performed very efﬁciently in parallel.
The fast summation technique of Diziol et al. is based on a sub-
division of all particles of the mesh in disjoint paths. A path i is
a set of vertices xi1, . . . , xin which are connected by edges. The
paths are determined in a pre-computation step. The goal of the
path construction algorithm is that each region is intersected by a
minimum number of paths. To determine the optimal path layout
is computationally expensive. Therefore, a heuristic is used to ﬁnd
a good path layout. Starting with a single vertex, adjacent vertices
are added to a path until the path length exceeds a maximum size
or cannot be extended any further. The heuristic tries to avoid gaps
by choosing vertices which have neighbours that are already part of
a path. To obtain paths which are as parallel as possible we add the
vertex which is closest to a plane passing through the starting vertex
of the current path, e.g. the xy-plane.
The fast summation is split in two phases (see Figure 17). In
the ﬁrst phase, the preﬁx sum for each path i is computed with
j ∈[1, ni]:
cp
ij =
j
	
k=1
˜mikxik,
Ap
ij =
j
	
k=1
˜mikxik ¯xT
ik.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
240
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Figure 18: This underwater scene demonstrates the ability of the
oriented particle approach to handle sparse meshes such as the
one-dimensional branches of the plants or the ﬁns of the lion ﬁsh.
Since the preﬁx sums for all paths are independent of each other, they
can be computed in parallel. The sums for a region r are computed
by ﬁrst setting cr := 0 and Ar := 0. Then, for each path i, which
intersects the region in the interval [ik, . . . , il], the following terms
are added:
cr := cr + cp
il −cp
ik−1,
Ar := Ar + Ap
il −Ap
ik−1.
(9)
The ﬁnal translational vector and the afﬁne matrix are determined
by cr := (1/ ˜Mr)cr and Ar := Ar −˜Mrcr ¯cT
r , respectively.
4.4. Oriented Particles
For a small number of particles or particles that are close to colinear
or coplanar (as in Figure 18), the matrix Ar in Equation (6) becomes
ill-conditioned and the polar decomposition needed to obtain the
optimal rotation tends to be numerically unstable.
To solve this problem, M¨uller et al. [MC11] proposed to use
oriented particles. By adding orientation information to particles,
the polar decomposition becomes stable even for single particles.
The moment matrix of a single spherical particle with orientation
R ∈R3×3 and ﬁnite radius r at the origin is well-deﬁned and can be
computed via an integral over its volume as
Asphere =

Vr ρ(Rx)xT dV = ρR

Vr xxT dV
=
4
15πr5ρR =
4
15πr5 m
Vr R
= 1
5mr2R,
where Vr is the volume of a sphere of radius r. Since R is an or-
thonormal matrix, Ai always has full rank and an optimal condition
number of 1. For an ellipsoid with radii a, b and c, we get
Aellipsoid = 1
5m
⎡
⎣
a2 0 0
0 b2 0
0 0 c2
⎤
⎦R.
However, the moment matrices of the individual particles cannot
simply be added because each one is computed relative to the origin.
We need the moment matrix of particle i relative to the position
xi −c.
Fortunately, this problem can be ﬁxed easily. As we saw above,
the equation for computing the moment matrix
A =
	
i
mi(xi −c)(¯xi −¯c)T
(10)
can be rewritten as
A =
	
i
mixi ¯xT
i −Mc¯cT,
where ¯c and c are the centres of mass of the initial and the deformed
shape, respectively (see Equation (5)).
Therefore, shifting the evaluation from the origin to the position
xi −c yields
Aglobal
i
= Ai + mixi ¯xT
i −mic¯cT.
Equation (10) now generalizes to
A
= 
i

Ai + mixi ¯xT
i

−Mc¯cT
= 
i

Ai + mi(xi −c)(¯xi −¯c)T
.
As you can see, the last form looks like Equation (10) but with all
the individual particle moment matrices added in the sum.
In addition to position x and velocity v, oriented particles carry a
rotation which can be deﬁned as an orthonormal matrix R as above
or a unit quaternion q. They also carry the angular velocity ω. In
the prediction step of position-based dynamics, these two quantities
have to be integrated as well:
xp
←x + vt
qp ←
 ω
|ω| sin (|ω|t
2
), cos(|ω|t
2
)

q.
For stability reasons, qp should directly be set to q if |ω| < ϵ.
After the prediction step, the solver iterates multiple times through
all shape match constraints in a Gauss-Seidel type fashion as be-
fore. To simulate objects represented by a mesh of linked particles,
M¨uller and Chentanez [MC11] deﬁne one shape matching group
per particle. A group contains the corresponding particle and all the
particles connected to it via a single edge. The positions of the par-
ticles in a group are updated as in regular shape matching by pulling
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
241
Figure 19: The rotation information of oriented particles cannot
only be used to stabilize shape matching, it also allows the use of
ellipsoids as collision primitives. The ﬁgure shows how the same
mesh is approximated much more accurately with ellipsoids (right)
than with the same number of spheres (left).
them towards the goal positions while the orientation of the centre
particle only is replaced by the optimal rotation of shape matching.
After the solver has modiﬁed the predicted state (xp, qp), the
current state is updated using the integration scheme
v
←(xp −x)/t
x
←xp
ω ←axis (qpq−1) · angle (qpq−1)/t
q
←qp,
where axis () returns the normalized direction of a quaternion and
angle () its angle. Again, for stability reasons, ω should be set to zero
directly if |angle (qpq−1)| < ϵ. There are two rotations, r = qpq−1
and −r transforming q into qp. It is important to always choose
the shorter one, i.e. if rw < 0 use −r, where rw is the real part
of the quaternion. As in traditional PBD for translation, changing
the rotational quantity qp in the solver also affects its time derivate
ω through the integration step creating the required second-order
effect.
The orientation information of particles cannot only be used to
stabilize shape matching but also to move a visual mesh along
with the physical mesh. With position and orientation, each particle
deﬁnes a full rigid transformation at every point in time. This allows
the use of traditional linear blend skinning with particles replacing
skeletal bones.
An additional advantage of having orientation information is that
ellipsoids can be used as collision volumes for particles. This allows
a more accurate approximation of the object geometry than with the
same number of spherical primitives (see Figure 19).
4.5. Extensions
There exist several extensions for shape matching. In the following,
we will introduce volume conservation and plastic deformation.
4.5.1. Volume conservation
The conservation of volume plays an important role in the dynamic
simulation of deformable bodies [HJCW06], [ISF07], [DBB09].
Since most soft biological tissues are incompressible, this is an
essential extension in the ﬁeld of medical simulation. However, it
is also used in the ﬁeld of shape modelling [vFTS06] since volume
conserving deformations appear more realistic.
In the following, we introduce the position-based approach for
volume conservation of Diziol et al. [DBB11]. This method con-
siders only the surface of a simulated object and does not require
interior particles which reduces the computational effort. The vol-
ume V of a volumetric 3D shape V can be determined by using the
divergence theorem as proposed in [Mir96] and [HJCW06]:

V

∇· x dx =

∂

V
xTn dx = 3V,
(11)
where ∂V is the boundary of the shape and n is the surface normal.
If the boundary is given as triangle mesh, the integral can be written
as sum over all triangles i:
V (X) := 1
3

∂

V
xTn dx = 1
9
	
i
Ai(xi1 + xi2 + xi3)Tni, (12)
where Ai is the area and i1, i2 and i3 are the vertex indices of the
ith triangle. Now we can deﬁne a volume constraint C := V (X) −
V ( ¯X) = 0 and compute a corresponding position correction (see
Section 3):
xV
i = −
wiC(X)

j wj∥∇xj C(X)∥2 ∇xiC(X).
(13)
The weights wi are used to realize a local volume conservation (see
below). The gradient can be approximated by
∇C(X) ≈1
3[nT
1, . . . , nT
n]T,
where ni =  Ajnj is the sum of the area weighted normals of all
triangles which contain particle i.
The weights in Equation (13) are chosen as follows:
wi = (1 −α)wl
i + αwg
i ,
wl
i =
∥xi∥

j ∥xj∥,
wg
i = 1
n,
where wl
i and wg
i are the weights for local and global volume con-
servation, respectively, and the user-deﬁned value α ∈[0, 1] is used
to blend between both. The vector xi contains the position change
of the ith particle in the shape matching step. Hence, strongly de-
formed particles participate more in volume correction. The weight
of a colliding particle is set to zero in order to ensure that a collision
constraint is not violated during the position correction for the vol-
ume conservation. Finally, the weights are smoothed by a Laplacian
ﬁlter.
Diziol et al. also propose another deﬁnition for the local weights
wl
i. To propagate volume changes through the object, they ﬁrst
determine pairs of opposing particles in a pre-processing step by
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
242
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Figure 20: Four spheres with different volume conservation
squeezed by a plate. Left to right: global conservation, local con-
servation with distance constraints, local conservation without dis-
tance constraints and no volume conservation. The maximum vol-
ume loss was 0.6%, 0.7%, 0.7% and 40%, respectively.
intersecting the geometry with multiple rays. For each particle i,
one particle k on the opposite side of the volumetric body is stored.
Then they choose a local weight which does not only depend on the
position change xi of a particle but also on the distance changes
di of the corresponding particle pairs:
wl
i =
βsidi + (1 −β)∥xi∥

j

βsjdj + (1 −β)∥xj∥
 ,
where si is a user-deﬁned stiffness parameter and β ∈[0, 1] is used
to deﬁne the inﬂuence of the distance changes.
Analogous to the positions correction, we perform a velocity cor-
rection to fulﬁl the constraint ∂C/∂t = 0. This leads to a divergence-
free velocity ﬁeld.
In Figure 20, different conﬁgurations for the presented volume
conservation method are compared with each other.
4.5.2. Plastic deformation
Shape matching can be extended in order to simulate plastic defor-
mations [MHTG05]. If we perform a polar decomposition Ar = RS
for the linear transformation matrix Ar (see Equation 6), we get a
rotational part R and a symmetric part S = RT Ar. The matrix S
represents a deformation in the unrotated reference frame. Hence,
for each region we can store the plastic deformation state in a matrix
Sp which is initialized with the identity matrix I. As proposed by
Goktekin et al. [GBO04], we use two parameters cyield and ccreep
to control the plastic behaviour of the material. If the condition
∥S −I∥2 > cyield is fulﬁlled for the deformation matrix S of the cur-
rent time step, the plastic deformation state is updated as follows:
Sp ←

I + tccreep(S −I)

Sp.
After this update, Sp is divided by 3√det (Sp) in order to conserve
the volume. The plastic state Sp is integrated in the shape matching
process by deforming the reference shape in Equation (6). This is
done by replacing the deﬁnition of ¯ri (see Section 4.1) with
¯ri = Sp (¯xi −¯c) .
Note that the plasticity can be bound by the condition ∥Sp −I∥2 >
cmax where cmax is the threshold for the maximum plastic defor-
mation. If this condition is fulﬁlled, we use Sp ←I + cmax(Sp −
I)/∥Sp −I∥2.
4.6. Cloth Simulation
Stumpp et al. [SSBT08] present a region-based shape matching
approach for the simulation of cloth. In their work, they deﬁne a
region for each triangle in the model. But instead of using the tri-
angles directly as regions for shape matching, overlapping regions
are deﬁned. The region of a triangle is deﬁned by the outer cor-
ners of its adjacent triangles. These overlapping regions enable the
bending resistance of the cloth model. Since the model of Stumpp
et al. uses regions with only three vertices, the stiffness of high-
resolution models is too low for realistic results. Therefore, they
introduce so-called ﬁbre clusters to increase the stretching stiffness.
These one-dimensional regions are determined in a pre-processing
step by subdividing the mesh into multiple edge strips. During the
simulation, each strip is traversed in both directions to obtain addi-
tional goal positions. The resulting displacements are translated so
that they sum up to zero to preserve the momentum of the model.
The ﬁnal goal positions are blended with the goal positions of the
triangular regions.
The usage of ﬁbre clusters increases the stiffness of the cloth
model. However, this effect is limited and for high-resolution models
the stiffness is still too low to achieve a realistic cloth behaviour.
Bender et al. [BWD13] solve this problem by the introduction of
multi-resolution shape matching (see Figure 21) which is based on
the idea of multi-grid solvers [Hac85]. A shape matching region is
deﬁned for each edge and each triangle in a cloth model. To increase
the inﬂuence of these simple regions and therefore the stretching and
shearing stiffness of the model, shape matching is performed on
different resolution levels. Multi-resolution shape matching enables
the robust simulation of stiff cloth models in linear time.
In the following, we ﬁrst describe 2D shape matching for trian-
gular regions and then introduce multi-resolution shape matching.
For a cloth simulation with triangular regions, shape matching
is performed per triangle in the 2D space of the triangle plane.
First, the optimal translation vectors of the regions are computed by
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
243
Figure 21: A stiff cloth model with 32 467 triangles is simulated
using multi-resolution shape matching with ﬁve hierarchy levels.
evaluating Equation (7). Then, for each triangle with the vertices x1,
x2 and x3 and the normal n a projection matrix is determined:
P =
 aT
x
aT
y

∈R2×3
with
ax =
x2 −x1
∥x2 −x1∥,
ay =
n × ax
∥n × ax∥.
The matrix P is used to project the vectors r and ¯r in Equation (6)
to get a 2D version of the matrix Ar:
¯r′
i = ¯P (¯xi −¯c) ,
r′
i = P (xi −c) ,
where ¯r′
i ∈R2 can be pre-computed. The optimal rotation for
shape matching is obtained by performing a 2D polar decompo-
sition [SD92] for the resulting matrix A′
r ∈R2×2. This rotation ma-
trix is used to compute 2D goal positions g′
i for the particles and the
corresponding 2D position changes x′
i:
g′
i = R′¯r′
i,
x′
i = α 1
|ℜi|(g′
i −x′
i).
Finally, the vectors x′
i are transformed to world space by xi =
PT x′
i and the particle positions are updated. This process is shown
in Figure 22.
In a simulation with multi-resolution shape matching [BWD13],
two intergrid transfer operators are required to couple the different
meshes in the multi-resolution hierarchy. The restriction operator
Il
l+1 transfers values from level l + 1 to the next coarser level l
and the prolongation operator Il+1
l
transfers values in the opposite
direction. These operators can be deﬁned by barycentric coordi-
nates [GW06]. In each simulation step, ﬁrst the positions of the
ﬁnest mesh are updated by time integration. For non-nested models,
0
x′
1
x′
2
x′
3
g′
1
g′
2
g′
3
a′
x
a′
y
0
¯x′
1
¯x′
2
¯x′
3
¯a′
x
¯a′
y
Figure 22: 2D shape matching. The initial conﬁguration of a trian-
gle in 2D (left) is matched to the deformed conﬁguration (middle) by
projecting the deformed triangle into 2D and computing the optimal
translation and rotation to get goal positions (right).
the positions of the coarser meshes are interpolated using the restric-
tion operator. Then multi-resolution shape matching is performed
in a V-cycle as described by Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Multi-resolution shape matching
1: for l = lmax to 1 do
2:
Store current positions: ˆxl ←xl
3:
Perform shape matching
4:
xl−1 := xl−1 +Il−1
l
(xl −ˆxl)
5: end for
6: for l = 0 to lmax do
7:
Store current positions: ˆxl ←xl
8:
Perform shape matching
9:
if l ̸= lmax then
10:
xl+1 := xl+1 +Il+1
l
(xl −ˆxl)
11:
end if
12: end for
In the restriction phase, the hierarchy is traversed from the ﬁnest
to the coarsest mesh performing a shape matching step on each level
and projecting the resulting position differences xl −ˆxl to the next
coarser level with the restriction operator. In the prolongation phase,
the hierarchy is traversed in the opposite direction. On each level,
a shape matching step is performed and the position differences are
interpolated and added to the next ﬁner level. Since only position
differences are propagated between the levels, ﬁne details are con-
served on ﬁner levels. However, ﬁne details could get lost if the
original shape matching method is used on the coarse levels of the
hierarchy. Wrinkles on a ﬁne resolution cause a compression of ele-
ments on a coarser level. Shape matching reduces this compression
and thus eliminates ﬁne details. Therefore, Bender et al. [BWD13]
propose a modiﬁed computation of the goal positions on the coarse
levels of the hierarchy so that shape matching only prevents stretch-
ing on these levels but not a compression.
4.7. Parallelization
In Section 4.3, we presented different fast summation techniques for
shape matching. The one of Diziol et al. [DBB11] is best suited for
a parallel implementation on the GPU. In the following, the GPU
implementation of this technique with CUDA is described in detail.
For such an implementation, memory access and memory layouts
play an important role as well as the number of kernel calls.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
244
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Since each kernel call introduces a computational overhead, the
particles of all objects in a simulation are packed into one single
array. This array is ordered according to the path layout which is used
for the fast summation (see Section 4.3). Since the array contains
the paths one after another, a segmented preﬁx sum [SHZO07] can
be used to determine the preﬁx sums of all paths at once. To avoid
numerical problems due to the 32-bit ﬂoating-point arithmetic on
the GPU, the path length is limited to 512. The resulting preﬁx sums
are stored in texture memory to beneﬁt from the texture cache when
the translational vectors and the afﬁne matrices are determined (see
Equation 9).
The volume conservation introduced in Section 4.5.1 can also be
performed efﬁciently on the GPU. This is done by evaluating the
volume integral (see Equation 11), the integral which is required
to obtain a divergence free velocity ﬁeld and the weights for the
local volume conservation in parallel. Both integrals can be written
as sums over the vertices (see Equation 12). Hence, the integrals as
well as the weights can be computed by a segmented sum reduction.
Finally, the smoothing of the weights by a Laplacian ﬁlter can
be performed in parallel using the fast summation technique as
described above.
The multi-resolution approach described in Section 4.6 can be
implemented on the GPU as follows. Shape matching on each level
of the hierarchy is performed by computing the goal positions per
element in parallel in a ﬁrst step. The results are stored for each
element. In a second step, shape matching is completed by summing
up the contributions of all elements containing a vertex to get a ﬁnal
goal position for the vertex. The restriction and the prolongation of
the results can be performed efﬁciently using the sparse matrix data
structure of Weber et al. [WBS*13]. This implementation allows
to simulate the deformation of a cloth model with more than 200K
triangles on the ﬁnest level in 22 ms/step on a GeForce GTX 470.
4.8. Discussion
Shape matching is efﬁcient, unconditionally stable and easy to im-
plement. However, the shape matching algorithm can only handle
small deformations. Therefore, the concept of region-based shape
matching was introduced as well as corresponding fast summation
techniques. Although this method is a meshless approach, many im-
plementations use a mesh to deﬁne the required overlapping regions.
Shape matching can even handle sparse structures by the usage of
oriented particles.
We also want to discuss the drawbacks of shape matching. Being a
geometric approach, only visually plausible results can be obtained.
The stiffness of the model does not only depend on the user-deﬁned
stiffness parameter α but also on the time step size and the region
sizes or, in case of multi-resolution shape matching, the number of
hierarchy levels. Moreover, the physical behaviour depends on the
mesh geometry and does not converge to a certain solution as the
mesh is reﬁned. Hence, adaptive time stepping and the application
of level-of-detail methods are open problems for further research.
5. Data-Driven Upsampling Methods
The behaviour of solid objects can be accurately described using
well-known mechanical models, but real-world materials display
other inherent sources of complexity that largely limit the results of
traditional models in computer animation. Complexity is produced,
for example, by non-linear or anisotropic behaviours, by heteroge-
neous properties, or by a wide frequency spectrum. These sources
of complexity are typically addressed by designing complex non-
linear constitutive models to describe the mechanical behaviour of
diverse materials. However, these models require computationally
expensive simulation algorithms, and their parameters are difﬁcult
and tedious to tune, particularly if the properties are heterogeneous.
All in all, the animation of solid objects is limited by the domain
of effects captured by the underlying physical models, but also by
their parametrization accuracy.
Data-driven methods offer an alternative to complex constitutive
models, as they turn the modelling metaphor into the knowledge of
a system’s response under several example conditions. This section
describes geometric data-driven methods in computer animation. It
formulates a two-scale representation of geometry and dynamics,
describes the computation of detailed geometry as the interpolation
of example data, and discusses several successful examples.
5.1. Two-Scale Geometry and Dynamics
Let us consider the surface of a solid object (e.g. the cloth in Fig-
ure 23), with vertex positions x ∈R3. These positions can be decom-
posed into a low-resolution position x0 and a ﬁne-scale displacement
x, expressed in a local reference system for each vertex (i.e. with
orientation R):
x = x0 + R x.
This deﬁnition of vertex positions essentially decomposes large-
scale geometry (i.e. the overall shape of a solid object) from the
small-scale deformation (i.e. wrinkles).
The large-scale and ﬁne-scale geometry can be represented at
different resolutions, connected through subdivision schemes. As
shown in Figure 23 for a cloth object, a low-resolution feature mesh
deﬁnes the large-scale deformation. A high-resolution smooth mesh
is obtained by subdividing the feature mesh a user-deﬁned number
of times, and can be regarded as an upsampled version of the feature
mesh. Finally, a high-resolution detail mesh is obtained by adding
local displacements onto the smooth mesh. The smooth and detail
meshes fully share the connectivity, thus trivially deﬁning their
correspondence.
Once large-scale and ﬁne-scale geometry are separated, they can
be computed using different models. The choice of models can be
made based on the following observations. First, for many objects
such as the face or cloth, the most salient dynamic effects can
be captured at a large scale. For example, Bickel et al. [BLB*08]
and Ma et al. [MJC*08] compute the large-scale face geometry
from an actor’s performance, using a single face scan and sparse
mocap markers as input, and a linear deformation model. Wang
et al. [WHRO10], Zurdo et al. [ZBO13] and Kavan et al. [KGBS11]
compute the large-scale geometry of cloth using a low-resolution
dynamics model with contact handling.
A second important observation is that plausible high-resolution
wrinkles can often be deﬁned as a quasi-static function in a reduced
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
245
Figure 23: Data-driven animation of cloth wrinkles. On the left, a low-resolution feature mesh, a smooth mesh obtained by subdivision and
a high-resolution detail mesh. On the right, a schematic depiction of the data-driven wrinkle computation. The feature mesh is subdivided to
obtain the smooth mesh, and then detailed wrinkles are added in a local reference frame by combining detail from examples.
low-resolution domain u. All authors mentioned in the previous
paragraph follow this observation to some extent. For the face,
and due to the repetitive nature of facial expressions, tissue be-
comes weaker at certain locations, and expressive wrinkles appear
in a deterministic fashion as a function of large-scale deforma-
tion, and indirectly as a function of muscle activations and facial
bone conﬁgurations. For cloth, even though real wrinkles require a
large number of degrees of freedom to capture their true diversity,
plausible wrinkles can be deﬁned in the reduced domain of large-
scale deformation. We can formally write the dependency between
high-resolution detail x and the low-resolution conﬁguration u as
x = f (u), where the function f is a position-based model.
The reduced-domain deﬁnition presents some limitations, which
should be mentioned upfront. Fine-scale wrinkle dynamics cannot
be captured, as wrinkles are deﬁned quasi-statically. And the model
captures only a limited set out of all the possible wrinkles that
a solid object might present. However, the power of data-driven
methods is that the generic function f makes use of data from
real deformation examples; therefore, data-driven wrinkles preserve
natural characteristics such as length, width and consistency over
time, and they appear plausible despite their limitations.
5.2. Data-Driven Geometric Detail
At this point, we have a suitable setting to deﬁne a position-based
data-driven model. For data collection, we need to record example
deformations (denoted by the subscript i), with vertex displace-
ments {xi} and low-resolution conﬁgurations {ui} in correspon-
dence. Then, we apply learning methods to design a data-driven
approximation of the function f , which can be formally deﬁned as
x ≈ˆf (u, {xi}, {ui}).
A general and successful approach to deﬁne a data-driven ap-
proximation ˆf is through a linear combination of example-based
basis functions,
x =
	
j
wj(u) bj
(14)
with weights wj computed as a function of the low-resolution
conﬁguration u. In the expression above, bj ∈R3 constitutes an
example-based detail displacement, and represents the values asso-
ciated with one vertex in the jth basis function.
In the rest of this section, we discuss several examples of position-
based data-driven deformation models, which differ in terms of the
choice of low-resolution conﬁguration, basis functions, or interpo-
lation method.
5.2.1. Weighted pose-space deformation (WPSD)
Bickel et al. [BLB*08] proposed a data-driven method to compute
facial wrinkles as a function of large-scale deformation and a small
set of example deformations, and later Zurdo et al. [ZBO13] fol-
lowed a similar strategy for cloth animation. Figure 24 shows an
example facial animation by Bickel et al., and Figure 25 an example
cloth animation by Zurdo et al.
In their methods, the basis function combination in Equation (14)
follows the WPSD approach [KM04]. In a nutshell, the basis func-
tions constitute local vertex displacements in example deformations,
called poses, and the weights w are convex weights for each of the
poses. The weights of the poses are computed using scattered-data
interpolation based on radial basis functions (RBFs) in pose space.
In this case, the pose space is given by the large-scale deformation u.
As shown by Zurdo et al., pose weights can be computed through
WPSD on the sparse vertices of the feature mesh, and then simply
interpolated to the vertices of the detail mesh using subdivision
weights. For the computation of pose weights on a given vertex,
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
246
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
Figure 24: Example of facial animation with the data-driven method of Bickel et al. [BLB*08]. From left to right: large-scale deformation
interpolating mocap markers, full result data-driven detail computation, the same result with full shading and comparison to the real actor’s
face.
Figure 25: Top row: a low-resolution model of a dress, with only 381 triangles, deﬁnes the dynamics, the large-scale deformation, and
response to contact. The dress is then subdivided to 24 384 triangles for rendering. Bottom row: high-resolution wrinkles are interpolated
from six example poses based on the large-scale deformation of the dress, using the data-driven method of Zurdo et al. [ZBO13].
WPSD requires a local deﬁnition of the pose space u. Both Bickel
et al. and Zurdo et al. use a metric of local low-resolution strain,
formed by concatenating the deformation of the 16 closest edges of
the feature mesh, multiplied by fast-decaying weights. With RBF
interpolation, the weight of each pose is computed as
wj =
	
i
ωi,j φ(∥u −ui∥).
The RBF weights ωk,j are pre-computed such that pose weights
fulﬁl the Kronecker delta for the database of poses, i.e. wj(ui) is 0 if
j ̸= i and 1 if j = i, for poses j and i in the database. The function
φ represents a speciﬁc type of RBF. Both Bickel et al. and Zurdo
et al. use RBFs with global support φ(r) = r, as they avoid complex
tuning of support radii for unevenly sampled data [CBC*01].
The selection of poses starts with the generation of training
data, which requires a database of synchronized feature and de-
tail meshes. Zurdo et al. employ the TRACKS method [BMWG07]
to pre-compute cloth simulations where the detail mesh tracks the
motion of the feature mesh. In the training simulations, contact is
solved both on the feature mesh and the detail mesh, and then the
high-resolution information in the poses captures the response to
contact. From all mesh pairs in the database, Zurdo et al. select only
a small number of poses (typically 6), until the L2 error between
synthesized animations and the training data set is below a certain
threshold. The set of poses is grown in a greedy manner, adding
each time the mesh pair with largest L2 error between the training
and synthesized conﬁgurations.
5.2.2. Polynomial displacement maps (PDM)
Ma et al. [MJC*08] designed PDM, a method for data-driven
computation of wrinkles in facial animation, following the
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
247
computational strategy of polynomial texture maps [MGW01]. De-
spite the computational differences, the method shares many simi-
larities with the WPSD approach of Bickel et al. [BLB*08].
In the general data-driven framework described by Equation (14),
the low-resolution conﬁguration of PDM is deﬁned as a 2D local
strain metric of the feature mesh, u = (u1, u2). In particular, this
metric is obtained through principal component analysis of a ﬁve-
dimensional vector formed by the local vertex offset and the in-plane
strain of the feature mesh. Based on this low-resolution conﬁgura-
tion, the weights in Equation (14) are deﬁned based on biquadratic
polynomials, w(u) = (u2
1 u2
2 u1u2 u1 u2 1). Finally, the detail po-
sition of each vertex in the detail mesh, x, is deﬁned as a scalar
displacement in the local normal direction.
Due to the choice of biquadratic PDMs, the per-vertex displace-
ments are computed through linear combination of six basis func-
tions, which are stored in texture maps. Ma et al. compute the
coefﬁcients in these texture maps as the result of a least-squares
problem that minimizes the ﬁtting error over the training data.
5.2.3. Physics-inspired upsampling (PIU)
Kavan et al. [KGBS11] proposed a data-driven method to compute
cloth animations with detailed wrinkles at video game frame rates.
In their approach, high-resolution cloth positions are computed
following a position-based data-driven method, but the data are
learned from dynamic simulations with tracking of high-resolution
and low-resolution geometry, similar to the approach by Zurdo
et al. [ZBO13] described earlier.
In PIU, the weights w in Equation (14) correspond directly to the
vertex positions of the feature mesh. The basis functions coefﬁcients
b extend subdivision schemes, and are learned from a database of
example deformations.
For the description of the method in more detail, let us deﬁne
the low-resolution deformation u as a vector that concatenates
the vertex positions of the low-resolution feature mesh. We also
deﬁne a matrix B of upsampling basis functions, being each row of
B the basis function for one vertex coordinate. Finally, we deﬁne a
vector X that concatenates all vertex positions of the high-resolution
detail mesh. Note that the method of Kavan et al. computes high-
resolution positions directly, not local displacements as discussed
earlier. With these deﬁnitions, the data-driven detail from Equa-
tion (14) can be rewritten as X = B u.
Given the data captured in training simulations, expressed as
example deformations of the feature mesh, {ui}, and the detail mesh,
{Xi}, Kavan et al. compute basis functions through an optimization
problem
B = arg min
	
i
∥B ui −Xi∥.
The optimization must satisfy additional constraints. In particu-
lar, the basis functions B must constitute a partition of unity, and
the objective function includes a regularization term to prevent
overﬁtting.
As mentioned earlier, one of the limitations of pure position-based
data-driven methods is that wrinkles are quasi-static functions of
low-resolution deformations. In PIU, Kavan et al. add oscillatory
modes to allow the simulation of travelling waves.
5.3. Parallelization
One of the most attractive features of position-based data-driven
methods is that they can be massively parallelized on GPUs. Taking
as reference Equation (14), the multiplication of basis weights times
the basis values follows the same procedure at all vertices of the
detail mesh, but it can be executed in a completely independent
manner on each vertex. Therefore, this multiplication is very well
suited for parallel implementation on GPUs. In fact, it can be handled
as a dense matrix–vector product.
Moreover, the evaluation of weights w can also be done inde-
pendently for each basis. In the PIU method described above, the
weights are trivially deﬁned as the positions of vertices in the fea-
ture mesh, hence they do not need further evaluation. In the WPSD
and PDM methods, on the other hand, these weights are computed
as a function of low-resolution deformation. As shown by Zurdo
et al. [ZBO13], the non-linear weights at feature vertices can be
evaluated easily on the CPU, and then interpolated to detail vertices
using subdivision weights. This interpolation step is trivial to paral-
lelize on single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) architectures.
Thanks to the highly parallel nature of data-driven algorithms,
existing implementations exhibit very high performance. For ex-
ample, Zurdo et al. [ZBO13] simulate cloth with 25.6K triangles
at 125 fps including contact handling on the feature mesh, Kavan
et al. [KGBS11] simulate a cape with 10K vertices at 1 kHz, and
Bickel et al. [BLB*08] animate a face with more than 1M triangles
at 30 fps.
5.4. Discussion
The particular data-driven methods discussed here present differ-
ent pros and cons. Among all methods, PIU is probably the fastest
method, as it relies on simple matrix-vector multiplication. How-
ever, the result is limited to a linear operator, and wrinkles may
appear smoothed. WPSD and PDM, on the other hand, allow non-
linear operators, and the combination of the input data is decided in
a local manner.
With WPSD and PDM, the representation is more compact,
thanks to the choice of low-resolution strain as interpolation domain.
Low-resolution strain also has been used as a parameter space for
cloth wrinkles in procedural models [RPC*10], or in the Wrinkle
Meshes method [MC10]. In the position-based Wrinkles Meshes
method, described in Section 3.6, the low-resolution strain affects
wrinkle modelling indirectly, as it inﬂuences the deformation of the
high-resolution cloth. Seiler et al. [SSH12] propose a different in-
terpolation domain based on local contact data, as their work targets
the animation of high-resolution effects due to contact interactions.
One limitation of most data-driven methods is that wrinkles are
deﬁned as a quasi-static function of the feature mesh, hence they
exhibit no dynamics. Kavan et al. [KGBS11] somewhat alleviate
this problem by adding oscillatory modes, but the solution does not
support all dynamic effects. The work of de Aguiar et al. [dASTH10]
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
248
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
offers an interesting approach to data-driven simulation of dynamic
effects, but it models low-resolution motion, not high-resolution
details.
The data-driven cloth upsampling method of Feng et al. [FYK10]
departs from those presented here. It not only deﬁnes ﬁne-scale
details in a data-driven manner, but also a mid-scale transformation
from a coarse cloth simulation. Its two deformation transformers, for
ﬁne-scale and mid-scale deformations, are learned using regression
with rotation-invariant data. The method of Feng et al. produces
high-quality results if the training sequence captures the dynamics
that will appear at runtime, but it will suffer larger errors otherwise.
This section has covered position-based data-driven methods for
animating high-resolution effects on solids, but recent advances
open the possibility to extend this paradigm also to ﬂuids. The
recent work of Kim et al. [KTT13] introduces a decomposition of
liquid surface geometry into a low-resolution surface plus high-
resolution ripples, just like the one deﬁned for solid surfaces in
Section 5.1 above. However, for liquids, a quasi-static deﬁnition of
high-resolution details is a particularly severe limitation. Kim et al.
propose a model that decouples low-resolution and high-resolution
dynamics, and they use the i Wave model [Tes04] to synthesize high-
resolution liquid ripples. We envision that such ripples could also
be synthesized from pre-computed data using a data-driven model.
6. Applications
In this section, we introduce different application areas of position-
based methods. These methods are mainly used in interactive ap-
plications where performance, controllability and stability are more
important than accuracy, like, e.g. in [SGdA*10], [DB13]. But there
exist also other works which use a position-based approach for
stabilization.
One application area for position-based methods is interactive
surgical simulation. In this area, Wang et al. [WXX*06] introduce a
mass-spring model based on a surface mesh to simulate deformable
bodies in real-time. Since such a model can neither preserve its
volume nor resume its rest shape in the absence of external forces,
the authors propose to couple the surface model with a rigid core
by using spring forces. This rigid core is simulated using shape
matching [MHTG05] which results in a fast and stable simulation.
Kubiak et al. [KPGF07] present a simulation method for surgical
threads which is based on the position-based dynamics approach
of M¨uller et al. [MHHR07]. Their method simulates the stiffness,
bending and torsion of a thread and also provides feedback for
a haptic device. For the simulation, Kubiak et al. deﬁne distance
constraints for stiffness and bending, torsion constraints, contact
constraints and friction constraints. The presented method allows
for an interactive and robust simulation of knots.
The simulation of complex hairstyles using a shape matching
approach is presented by Rungjiratananon et al. [RKN10]. Their
approach is based on Lattice Shape Matching which was originally
introduced by Rivers and James [RJ07]. For the simulation, each
hair strand is represented by a chain of particles which is subdivided
in overlapping chain regions. After shape matching an additional
position-based strain limiting is applied to each strand which moves
the particles in the direction of their root. Different hair styles are
realized by using appropriate initial conﬁgurations and by modifying
the region sizes of a chain.
O’Brien et al. [ODC11] use position-based dynamics for the
physically plausible adaptation of motion-captured animations. In
their work, they use a vertex-based character skeleton and different
constraints to preserve the skeleton structure, to deﬁne joint lim-
its and to implement a centre of mass control. In addition to the
kinematic constraints, they deﬁne a couple of dynamics constraints
which consider vertices in multiple frames. Dynamics constraints
are used to enforce smooth acceleration and dynamical correctness.
Fierz et al. [FSAH12] introduce a position-based approach to sta-
bilize a ﬁnite element simulation. When using an explicit time inte-
gration for a ﬁnite element simulation, the time step size is typically
limited by the stiffness of the model and its spatial discretization. In
each simulation step, Fierz et al. use the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy
(CFL) condition to determine the maximum allowed time step size
for each tetrahedral element in their volumetric simulation model.
However, instead of using the time step size given by the CFL condi-
tion to perform a stable simulation step with an explicit integration
scheme, they use a ﬁxed size and mark all elements where the con-
dition is not met. The marked elements are then simulated using a
shape matching approach while for all other elements a linear FEM
is used for the simulation.
7. Conclusion
In this survey, we focused on a popular and practically relevant
subset of approaches for dynamically deforming solids, namely
on position-based approaches. Such geometrically motivated tech-
niques are not force-driven and are particularly appropriate in in-
teractive applications due to their versatility, robustness, controlla-
bility and efﬁciency. We explained general ideas of position-based
methods, shape-matching approaches and data-driven techniques.
Various deformation aspects for 2D and 3D solids and efﬁcient solu-
tion strategies were discussed with a particular focus on the beneﬁts
of position-based approaches compared to force-driven techniques.
Acknowledgements
The work of Jan Bender was supported by the ‘Excellence Initiative’
of the German Federal and State Governments and the Graduate
School CE at TU Darmstadt. Miguel A. Otaduy was partially funded
by the Spanish Ministry of Economy (grant TIN2012-35840) and the
European Research Council (ERC-2011-StG-280135 Animetrics).
References
[BB08] BENDER J., BAYER D.: Parallel simulation of inextensible
cloth. In VRIPHYS 08: Proceedings of Fifth Workshop in Virtual
Reality Interactions and Physical Simulations (2008), pp. 47–56.
[BETC12] BENDER J., ERLEBEN K., TRINKLE J., COUMANS E.: Interac-
tive simulation of rigid body dynamics in computer graphics. In
EG 2012 - State of the Art Reports (2012), Cani and F. Ganovelli,
(Eds.), Eurographics Association, pp. 95–134.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
249
[BLB*08] BICKEL B., LANG M., BOTSCH M., OTADUY M. A., GROSS
M.: Pose-space animation and transfer of facial details. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on
Computer Animation (2008), pp. 57–66.
[BMF03] BRIDSON R., MARINO S., FEDKIW R.: Simulation of
clothing with folds and wrinkles. In Proceedings of the
ACM/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation (2003),
pp. 28–36.
[BMWG07] BERGOU M., MATHUR S., WARDETZKY M., GRINSPUN E.:
TRACKS: Toward directable thin shells. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGGRAPH (2007).
[BW98] BARAFF D., WITKIN A.: Large steps in cloth simulation. In
SIGGRAPH ’98: Proceedings of Computer Graphics and Inter-
active Techniques (1998), ACM, pp. 43–54.
[BWD13] BENDER J., WEBER D., DIZIOL R.: Fast and stable cloth
simulation based on multi-resolution shape matching. Computers
& Graphics (2013).
[CBC*01] CARR J. C., BEATSON R. K., CHERRIE J. B., MITCHELL T.
J., FRIGHT W. R., MCCALLUM B. C., EVANS T. R.: Reconstruction
and representation of 3D objects with radial basis functions. In
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH (2001), pp. 67–76.
[Cro84] CROW F. C.: Summed-area tables for texture mapping. SIG-
GRAPH Computer Graphics 18, 3 (Jan. 1984), 207–212.
[dASTH10] DE AGUIAR E., SIGAL L., TREUILLE A., HODGINS J. K.: Sta-
ble spaces for real-time clothing. ACM Transactions on Graphics
29, 4 (July 2010), 106:1–106:9.
[DB13] DEUL C., BENDER J.: Physically-based character skinning.
In VRIPHYS 13: Proceedings of 10th Workshop on Virtual Real-
ity Interactions and Physical Simulations (Lille, France, 2013),
Eurographics Association, pp. 25–34.
[DBB09] DIZIOL R., BENDER J., BAYER D.: Volume conserving sim-
ulation of deformable bodies. In Short Paper Proceedings of
Eurographics (Mar. 2009).
[DBB11] DIZIOL R., BENDER J., BAYER D.: Robust real-time deforma-
tion of incompressible surface meshes. In SCA ’11: Proceedings
of the 2011 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Com-
puter Animation (2011), Eurographics Association.
[DSB99] DESBRUN M., SCHR¨ODER P., BARR A.: Interactive animation
of structured deformable objects. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH
99 (1999), ACM, pp. 1–8.
[FSAH12] FIERZ B., SPILLMANN J., AGUINAGA I., HARDERS M.: Main-
taining large time steps in explicit ﬁnite element simulations
using shape matching. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 18, 5 (May 2012), 717 –728.
[FYK10] FENG W.-W., YU Y., KIM B.-U.: A deformation transformer
for real-time cloth animation. ACM Transactions on Graphics 29,
4 (July 2010), 108:1–108:9.
[GBO04] GOKTEKIN T. G., BARGTEIL A. W., O’BRIEN J. F.: A method
for animating viscoelastic ﬂuids. ACM Transactions on Graphics
23, 3 (August 2004), 463–468.
[GHF*07] GOLDENTHAL R., HARMON D., FATTAL R., BERCOVIER M.,
GRINSPUN E.: Efﬁcient simulation of inextensible cloth. ACM
Trans. Graph. 26, 3 (2007), 49.
[GM97] GIBSON S. F., MIRTICH B.: A survey of deformable modeling
in computer graphics. Tech. Rep. TR-97-19, Mitsubishi Electric
Research Lab., 1997.
[GW06] GEORGII J., WESTERMANN R.: A multigrid framework for
real-time simulation of deformable bodies. Computer & Graphics
30 (2006), 408–415.
[Hac85] HACKBUSCH W.: Multi-Grid Methods and Applications, vol.
4 of Springer Series in Computational Mathematics. Springer,
1985.
[HJCW06] HONG M., JUNG S., CHOI M., WELCH S.: Fast volume
preservation for a mass-spring system. IEEE Comput. Graph.
Appl. 26 (2006), 83–91.
[ISF07] IRVING G., SCHROEDER C., FEDKIW R.: Volume conserving
ﬁnite element simulations of deformable models. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics 26, 3 (July 2007), 13:1–13:6.
[Jak01] JAKOBSEN T.: Advanced character physics. In Proceedings,
Game Developer’s Conference 2001 (2001).
[JP99] JAMES D. L., PAI D. K.: Artdefo: Accurate real time de-
formable objects. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 99 (1999),
ACM, pp. 65–72.
[KCM12] KIM T.-Y., CHENTANEZ N., M¨ULLER M.: Long range at-
tachments — A method to simulate inextensible clothing in
computer games. In Proceedings of the Eurographics/ACM
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Computer Animation (2012), J.
Lee, and P. Kry, (Eds.), Eurographics Association, pp. 305–
310.
[KGBS11] KAVAN L., GERSZEWSKI D., BARGTEIL A. W., SLOAN P.-P.:
Physics-inspired upsampling for cloth simulation in games. In
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH (2011).
[KM04] KURIHARA T., MIYATA N.: Modeling deformable human
hands from medical images. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation
(2004), pp. 357–366.
[KPGF07] KUBIAK B., PIETRONI N., GANOVELLI F., FRATARCAN-
GELI M.: A robust method for real-time thread simulation.
In VRST ’07: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM Symposium on
Virtual Reality Software and Technology (2007), ACM, pp.
85–88.
[KTT13] KIM T., TESSENDORF J., TH¨UREY N.: Closest point turbulence
for liquid surfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics 32, 2 (April
2013), 15:1–15:13.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
250
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
[LBOK13] LIU T., BARGTEIL A. W., O’BRIEN J. F., KAVAN L.: Fast
simulation of mass-spring systems. In Proceedings of ACM SIG-
GRAPH Asia (Hong Kong, 2013). ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics 32, 6 (Nov. 2013), 209:1–7.
[LG98] LIN M. C., GOTTSCHALK S.: Collision detection between
geometric models: A survey. In Proceedings of IMA Conference
on Mathematics of Surfaces (1998), pp. 37–56.
[MC10] M¨ULLER M., CHENTANEZ N.: Wrinkle meshes. In SCA’10:
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Sympo-
sium on Computer Animation (2010), Eurographics Association,
pp. 85–92.
[MC11] M¨ULLER M., CHENTANEZ N.: Solid simulation with oriented
particles. ACM Trans. Graph. 30, 4 (July 2011), 92:1–92:10.
[MCG03] M¨ULLER M., CHARYPAR D., GROSS M.: Particle-based ﬂuid
simulation for interactive applications. In SCA ’03: Proceedings
of the 2003 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Com-
puter Animation (2003), Eurographics Association, pp. 154–159.
[MGW01] MALZBENDER T., GELB D., WOLTERS H.: Polynomial tex-
ture maps. In Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2001(Aug. 2001),
Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference Series, pp.
519–528.
[MHHR07] M¨ULLER M., HEIDELBERGER B., HENNIX M., RATCLIFF J.:
Position based dynamics. Journal of Visual Communication and
Image Representation 18, 2 (2007), 109–118.
[MHTG05] M¨ULLER M., HEIDELBERGER B., TESCHNER M., GROSS M.:
Meshless deformations based on shape matching. ACM Trans.
Graph. 24, 3 (2005), 471–478.
[Mir96] MIRTICH B.: Fast and accurate computation of polyhedral
mass properties. Journal of Graphics Tools 1, 2 (February 1996),
31–50.
[MJC*08] MA W.-C., JONES A., CHIANG J.-Y., HAWKINS T., FREDERIK-
SEN S., PEERS P., VUKOVIC M., OUHYOUNG M., DEBEVEC P.: Facial
performance synthesis using deformation-driven polynomial dis-
placement maps. In Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Asia, ACM
Transactions on Graphics 27, 5 (2008).
[MKC12] M¨ULLER M., KIM T.-Y., CHENTANEZ N.: Fast simulation of
inextensible hair and fur. In VRIPHYS 12: Proceedings of 9th
Workshop on Virtual Reality Interactions and Physical Simula-
tions (2012), Eurographics Association.
[MM13] MACKLIN M., M¨ULLER M.: Position based ﬂuids. ACM
Transactions on Graphics 32, 4 (July 2013), 104:1–104:12.
[Mon92] MONAGHAN J. J.: Smoothed particle hydrodynamics. An-
nual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 30, 1 (1992), 543–
574.
[Mon94] MONAGHAN J. J.: Simulating free surface ﬂows with SPH.
Journal of. Computational Physics 110, 2 (February 1994), 399–
406.
[MSJT08] M¨ULLER M., STAM J., JAMES D., TH¨UREY N.: Real time
physics: Class notes. In SIGGRAPH ’08: ACM SIGGRAPH 2008
classes (2008), ACM, pp. 88:1–88:90.
[MTV05] MAGNENAT-THALMANN N., VOLINO P.: From early drap-
ing to haute couture models: 20 years of research. The Visual
Computer 21 (2005), 506–519.
[M¨ul08] M¨ULLER M.: Hierarchical Position Based Dynamics. In
VRIPHYS 08: Proceedings of Fifth Workshop in Virtual Reality
Interactions and Physical Simulations (2008), F. Faure and M.
Teschner (Eds.), Eurographics Association, pp. 1–10.
[NMK*06] NEALEN A., M¨ULLER M., KEISER R., BOXERMAN E., CARL-
SON M.: Physically based deformable models in computer graph-
ics. Computer Graphics Forum 25, 4 (December 2006), 809–836.
[ODC11] O’BRIEN C., DINGLIANA J., COLLINS S.: Spacetime ver-
tex constraints for dynamically-based adaptation of motion-
captured animation. In SCA ’11: Proceedings of the 2011 ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation
(2011), ACM, pp. 277–286.
[OH99] O’BRIEN J. F., HODGINS J. K.: Graphical modeling and ani-
mation of brittle fracture. In SIGGRAPH ’99: Proceedings of the
26th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques (New York, NY, USA, 1999), ACM Press/Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co., pp. 137–146.
[PB88] PLATT J. C., BARR A. H.: Constraints methods for ﬂexi-
ble objects. In SIGGRAPH ’88: Proceedings of the 15th Annual
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
(1988), ACM, pp. 279–288.
[Pro95] PROVOT X.: Deformation constraints in a mass-spring model
to describe rigid cloth behavior. In Proceedings of Graphics Inter-
face (1995), W. A. Davis and P. Prusinkiewicz (Eds.), Canadian
Human-Computer Communications Society, pp. 147–154.
[RJ07] RIVERS A. R., JAMES D. L.: FastLSM: fast lattice shape match-
ing for robust real-time deformation. In SIGGRAPH ’07: ACM
SIGGRAPH 2007 papers (2007), ACM, p. 82.
[RKN10] RUNGJIRATANANON W., KANAMORI Y., NISHITA T.: Chain
shape matching for simulating complex hairstyles. Computer
Graphics Forum 29, 8 (2010), 2438–2446.
[RPC*10] ROHMER D., POPA T., CANI M.-P., HAHMANN S., SHEFFER
A.: Animation wrinkling: Augmenting coarse cloth simulations
with realistic-looking wrinkles. ACM Transactions on Graphics
29, 5 (2010), 157:1–157:8.
[SD92] SHOEMAKE K., DUFF T.: Matrix animation and polar decom-
position. In Proceedings of the Conference on Graphics Inter-
face ’92 (1992), Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., pp. 258–
264.
[SGdA*10] STOLL C., GALL J., DE AGUIAR E., THRUN S., THEOBALT
C.: Video-based reconstruction of animatable human characters.
ACM Trans. Graph. 29, 6 (Dec. 2010), 139:1–139:10.
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
J. Bender et al. / A Survey on Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics
251
[SGT09] SCHMEDDING R., GISSLER M., TESCHNER M.: Optimized
damping for dynamic simulations. In Proceedings of Spring Con-
ference on Computer Graphics (2009), pp. 205–212.
[SHZO07] SENGUPTA S., HARRIS M., ZHANG Y., OWENS J. D.: Scan
primitives for GPU computing. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Graphics Hardware
(2007), Eurographics Association, pp. 97–106.
[SKBK13] SCHMITT N., KNUTH M., BENDER J., KUIJPER A.: Multilevel
Cloth Simulation using GPU Surface Sampling. In VRIPHYS 13:
Proceedings of 10th Workshop on Virtual Reality Interactions
and Physical Simulations (Lille, France, 2013), Eurographics
Association, pp. 1–10.
[SOG08] STEINEMANN D., OTADUY M. A., GROSS M.: Fast adaptive
shape matching deformations. In SCA ’08: Proceedings of the
2008 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer
Animation (2008), Eurographics Association, pp. 87–94.
[SSBT08] STUMPP T., SPILLMANN J., BECKER M., TESCHNER M.: A
Geometric Deformation Model for Stable Cloth Simulation. In
VRIPHYS 08: Proceedings of Fifth Workshop in Virtual Reality
Interactions and Physical Simulations (2008), F. Faure and M.
Teschner (Eds.), Eurographics Association, pp. 39–46.
[SSH12] SEILER M., SPILLMANN J., HARDERS M.: Enriching
coarse interactive elastic objects with high-resolution data-
driven deformations. In SCA ’12: Proceedings of the ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation
(2012), Eurographics Association, pp. 9–17.
[Sta09] STAM J.: Nucleus: Towards a uniﬁed dynamics solver for
computer graphics. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design and Computer Graphics
(2009), pp. 1–11.
[TBHF03] TERAN J., BLEMKER S., HING V. N. T., FEDKIW R.: Finite
volume methods for the simulation of skeletal muscle. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium
on Computer Animation (2003), Eurographics Association, pp.
68–74.
[Tes04] TESSENDORF J.: Simulating ocean water. ACM SIGGRAPH
2004 Course Notes (2004).
[TF88] TERZOPOULOS D., FLEISCHER K.: Deformable models. The
Visual Computer 4 (1988), 306–331.
[THMG04] TESCHNER M., HEIDELBERGER B., MULLER M., GROSS
M.: A versatile and robust model for geometrically complex
deformable solids. In CGI ’04: Proceedings of the Computer
Graphics International (Washington, DC, USA, 2004), IEEE
Computer Society, pp. 312–319.
[TKH*05] TESCHNER M., KIMMERLE S., HEIDELBERGER B., ZACH-
MANN G., RAGHUPATHI L., FUHRMANN A., CANI M.-P., FAURE F.,
MAGNENAT-THALMANN N., STRASSER W., VOLINO P.: Collision de-
tection for deformable objects. Computer Graphics Forum 24, 1
(Mar. 2005), 61–81.
[TPBF87a] TERZOPOULOS D., PLATT J., BARR A., FLEISCHER K.: Elasti-
cally deformable models. In SIGGRAPH ’87: Proceedings of the
14th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques (1987), ACM, pp. 205–214.
[TPBF87b] TERZOPOULOS D., PLATT J., BARR A., FLEISCHER K.: Elas-
tically deformable models. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 87,
Computer Graphics 21 (1987), 205–214.
[vFTS06] VON FUNCK W., THEISEL H., SEIDEL H.-P.: Vector ﬁeld based
shape deformations. ACM Transsactions on Graphics 25, 3 (July
2006), 1118–1125.
[WBS*13] WEBER D., BENDER J., SCHNOES M., STORK A., FELLNER D.:
Efﬁcient GPU data structures and methods to solve sparse linear
systems in dynamics applications. Computer Graphics Forum 32,
1 (2013), 16–26.
[WHRO10] WANG H., HECHT F., RAMAMOORTHI R., O’BRIEN J.:
Example-based wrinkle synthesis for clothing animation. ACM
Transactions on Graphics 29, 4 (July 2010), 107:1–107:8.
[WOR10] WANG H., O’BRIEN J., RAMAMOORTHI R.: Multi-resolution
isotropic strain limiting. ACM Trans. Graph. 29, 6 (Dec. 2010),
156:1–156:10.
[WXX*06] WANG Y., XIONG Y., XU K., TAN K., GUO G.: A mass-
spring model for surface mesh deformation based on shape
matching. In GRAPHITE ’06: Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-
niques in Australasia and Southeast Asia (2006), ACM, pp. 375–
380.
[ZBO13] ZURDO J. S., BRITO J. P., OTADUY M. A.: Animating wrin-
kles by example on non-skinned cloth. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 19, 1 (2013).
c⃝2014 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c⃝2014 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 14678659, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cgf.12346 by Institute Of Science Tokyo, Wiley Online Library on [26/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
