IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
569
Haptic Rendering Using Reality-Based Force Proﬁles
in Surgical Simulation
Øystein Bjelland
, Bismi Rasheed
, Intissar Cherif, Andreas Fagerhaug Dalen
, Amine Chellali
,
Martin Steinert
, and Robin T. Bye
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents a novel method for simplify-
ing kinesthetic haptic rendering of complex contact interactions
in arthroscopic surgery training simulators using reality-based
force proﬁles. We demonstrate continuous kinesthetic feedback for
applications to arthroscopic knee portal creation and diagnostic
meniscusexamination.Thisinvolvesmeasuringcharacteristicforce
proﬁles in ex vivo experiments, simulator implementation in SOFA,
and performing user validation experiments. When comparing the
methodwithlinear-elastic-basedhapticfeedbackformeniscusstiff-
ness discrimination, novices had difference thresholds of 1.80 MPa
(linear-elastic) and 1.47 MPa (reality-based), while experts showed
thresholds of 0.99 MPa and 1.39 MPa, respectively, indicating ﬁner
sensitivity among experts. Experts also used signiﬁcantly less force
(p< 0.05) and had shorter decision times (p< 0.05) than novices
across both methods, indicating construct validity. Although kines-
thetic feedback was veriﬁed with ex vivo experiments for portal cre-
ation, user validation was here inconclusive due to minor inconsis-
tencies in the integration of visual and haptic feedback. Limitations
include triggering material removal via instrument penetration
instead of haptic force limits, as well as omitting contact vibrations.
The method gives only a minor reduction in computation speed.
Examples are available on GitHub.
Index Terms—Haptic feedback, kinesthetic feedback, arthro-
scopic surgery, simulation.
Received 16 September 2024; revised 4 February 2025 and 7 May 2025;
accepted 14 May 2025. Date of publication 16 May 2025; date of current
version 19 September 2025. This work was supported by the NTNU - Norwegian
University of Science and Technology. This article was recommended for pub-
lication by Associate Editor C. Pacchierotti and Editor-in-Chief D. Prattichizzo
upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding author: Øystein
Bjelland.)
This research involves the use of human cadaveric specimens, and has been
considered by the Norwegian Research Ethics Committee (REC), Application
214114. The study has followed the ethical principles for medical research
involving human subjects outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki.
Øystein Bjelland, Bismi Rasheed, Martin Steinert, and Robin T. Bye are with
the Departments of ICT and Natural Sciences and Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering, NTNU - Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 6009
˚Alesund, Norway (e-mail: oystein.bjelland@ntnu.no; bismi.rasheed@ntnu.no;
martin.steinert@ntnu.no; robin.t.bye@ntnu.no).
Intissar Cherif is with the Department of Computer Science, Université de
Biskra, Biskra 07000, Algeria, and also with the Department of Computer
Engineering, Université d’Évry, Université Paris-Saclay, 91000 Évry, France
(e-mail: intissar.cherif@univ-biskra.dz).
Andreas Fagerhaug Dalen is with the Department of Research and In-
novation, ˚Alesund General Hospital, 6017 ˚Alesund, Norway (e-mail: an-
dreas.fagerhaug.dalen@helse-mr.no).
Amine Chellali is with the Department of Computer Engineering,
Université d’Évry, Université Paris-Saclay, 91000 Évry, France (e-mail:
amine.chellali@univ-evry.fr).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TOH.2025.3570810
I. INTRODUCTION
C
OMPUTER-BASED simulations are of increasing impor-
tance for ﬁlling the training gap needed to transition from
resident doctor to specialist in surgery. Arthroscopic surgery
is a ﬁeld within orthopedics that is concerned with minimally
invasive surgery on joints to reduce pain or restore joint function.
A handful of commercial training simulators exist for arthro-
scopic surgery, such as Virtamed ArthroS (Switzerland), Surgi-
calScience ArthroMentor (Sweden) and Simendo Arthroscopy
(USA). However, none of these include training in arthroscopic
portal placement [1], despite being ranked as the second highest
priority skill in arthroscopy [2]. The role of haptic feedback
in such simulators have been described as very important. For
example, in an editorial article in Arthroscopy from 2019, R.M.
Frank concludes that “the value of any VR simulator that does
not provide tactile feedback (...) is unclear” [3]. Moreover,
in a review from 2019, Overtoom et al. assessed the value
of haptic feedback in simulation training for laparoscopy [4].
They found that variable results have been found from adding
haptic feedback, because existing systems cannot provide the
same tactility as in fresh frozen cadavers. They also found that
surgeons consider the lack of tactile feedback as an important
weakness in existing simulators.
To model haptic interactions involved with arthroscopic knee
surgery, probing and cutting in soft and hard tissues must
be addressed. Sensory substitution through cutaneous/tactile
feedback has been demonstrated for many applications within
robotic surgery [5]. However, virtual reality (VR) simulations
are not constrained by safety issues with stability of grounded
kinesthetic feedback, as no patient harm is risked. Rather, we
argue that functional task alignment, which refers to whether
training is transferable to the operating room, is best pre-
served through kinesthetic haptic feedback. This is because
cutaneous/tactile stimuli are also naturally conveyed through
kinesthetic feedback, and are representative for arthroscopy, as
the surgeon mostly uses an instrument to manipulate tissue. Such
functional tasks can include triangulation, which involves pro-
prioception, handling specialized surgical instruments, which
require the development of dexterous motor skills, and learning
the tactile sensation of tissues through a surgical instrument.
For suspected meniscus injury, the surgeon creates lateral and
medial incisions and then introduces a camera and a probe into
the knee compartment for examination. Two tasks relying on
dexterous motor skills and tactility are (i) creating incisions
1939-1412 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
570
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
using a scalpel blade, where an overshoot could injure the
ligaments, menisci and cartilage tissues, all of which have little
healing potential, and (ii) assessing the stiffness of the meniscus
tissue by probing, as a decrease in stiffness has been found to
indicate meniscus degeneration [6]. A degenerative meniscus
could cause arthrosis, and therefore the stiffness of the tissue
couldaffectthedecisionofwhethertoresectorsutureameniscus
tear. Convincing haptic display is, therefore, essential for safely
practicing these skills. Following general triangulation, portal
creation, and examination have been identiﬁed as the most
important skills for simulation training in arthroscopy [2].
Our work focuses on haptic modelling of complex con-
tact interactions experienced in surgery. We propose a reality-
based method for enhancing kinesthetic feedback in a three-
dimensional (3D) ﬁnite element (FE) simulation environment
by enabling the use of empirically measured characteristic force
proﬁles. The method is demonstrated for applications in the
human knee, with arthroscopic portal creation and meniscus
examination as examples. However, the method is applicable
to any type of surgery.
II. RELATED WORK AND CONTRIBUTIONS
A. Related Work
Computing mechanical forces from interactions between a
virtual surgical instrument and a biomechanical tissue model
lies at the core of this work. The computations are on the
biomechanical physics side constrained by the need to satisfy
visual refresh rate requirements and perform collision detection,
in the range of 25–30 Hz. The mass-spring method (MSM) was
previously popular due to its low computational load. However,
it is difﬁcult to achieve a realistic force response from tuning in-
dividual springs. Position-based dynamics (PBD) works directly
on positions to solve geometric constraints, which makes it fast
and free of instabilities. It has recently been applied for surgical
simulations in laparoscopy and endoscopy [7]. However, since
stiffness depends on the time step, it is challenging to achieve a
realistic force response [8]. The ﬁnite element method (FEM) is
considered the gold standard in soft tissue biomechanics because
of its high accuracy force response, even if it has a higher
computational load than PBD and MSM [9].
On the haptic side, computations need to meet refresh rates of
about 500–1000 Hz to satisfy stability of the haptic device [10],
as well as the sensitive tactile receptors of individuals [11].
To meet stability requirements in kinesthetic display of rigid
bodies, virtual coupling, and the God-object method have been
introduced [12]. These ensure visual non-penetration as well
as stiffness and damping parameters that can be tuned to en-
sure stability and model rigid body haptic interactions. In knee
arthroscopy, this is relevant for bony structures where geometry,
friction and texture dominate the haptic sensation. Constraint-
based methods have later been developed to handle haptic ren-
deringofcomplexcontactinteractionsinthecontextofFE-based
soft-tissue simulations. Relevant tissues in the knee include
the skin, ligaments, and menisci. Here, the contact response
is formulated as the linear complementary problem (LCP) for
unilateral contacts [13] and bilateral contacts [14]. This method
is referred to as constraint-based multi-rate compliant mecha-
nisms, and contact forces are computed using Lagrange mul-
tipliers. Because constraints are formulated in a physics loop
and resolved in a separate haptic loop, haptic refresh rates are
ensured. Such implementation exists in the Simulation Open
Framework Architecture (SOFA) [15].
Multi-rate compliant mechanisms provide an elegant way of
computing haptic forces from FE-based soft-tissue deformation.
However, the method is limited by constitutive biomechanics
inherent in FEM [16]. For example, the co-rotational FEM
(CFEM) is a neat way of modelling geometric nonlinearities
while using linear-elastic material parameters, thereby not hav-
ing to recompute the stiffness matrix at each time step which
reduces computational loads. However, the contact force re-
sponse from material deformation is limited to be linear, while
many interactions are nonlinear. For example, have both skin and
meniscus tissue been shown to exhibit nonlinear and anisotropic
behavior [17], [18], which could affect both arthroscopic portal
creation and meniscus probing exercises. Although FEM with
hyperelastic constitutive models can describe material non-
linearities, stability can be compromised under the constraint
of computational speed which makes it risky for interactive
real-time simulation [19]. Also, model ﬁtting can be complex.
Furthermore, it has been shown that coarse FE-meshes used to
satisfy real-time requirements affect the accuracy, and therefore,
the same mechanical contact force response as used for calibra-
tion is not guaranteed [20].
Moving into soft tissue topology change, such as cutting or
materialremoval,kinestheticforcefeedbackbecomesevenmore
challenging. Some work has addressed bone removal scenarios
but is limited to rigid objects [21]. With FEM, topology change
is modeled with element removal and subsequent update of the
global stiffness matrix, of which the updated compliance of the
soft tissue can be rendered [22], [23]. This is useful for example
in displaying the compliance of a cut skin. The cutFEM [24]
and co-rotational cutFEM have been proposed for modelling
soft tissue cutting [25]. The idea is to use a non-conforming
background mesh to reduce the computational burden of mesh
generation. However, a fundamental challenge in haptic render-
ing during tissue removal is that when an element is removed,
in what we must assume is a somewhat coarse computational
mesh, impedance is temporarily removed and dynamic ampliﬁ-
cations are introduced once the instrument collides with the next
element, which could compromise stability. Also, the normal
directions of the cutting surface can vary quite dramatically
for coarse tetrahedral meshes, making constraint-based haptic
feedback unsuitable.
Pioneering work modelled haptic interactions directly from
tool-tissue interaction experiments in reality-based mod-
elling [26], [27]. Today, many researchers still rely on reality-
based methods to develop haptic feedback for surgical proce-
dures. However, studies often involve specialized devices that
are mostly not integrated with established simulation frame-
works that model 3D soft tissue physics due to cumbersome
implementation [1], [28], [29], [30]. Furthermore, reality-based
modelling has renewed relevance due to recent technological
developments. In surgery, such as computer-assisted orthopedic
surgery (CAOS), the use of intraoperative navigation and force
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BJELLAND et al.: HAPTIC RENDERING USING REALITY-BASED FORCE PROFILES IN SURGICAL SIMULATION
571
registration techniques are making their way into the operating
room, making interaction data more available than ever [31].
Data-driven methods, for example, within machine learning,
have also shown good performance in modelling haptic inter-
actions [32]. As such, there is a need for structured methods
to leverage haptic rendering from FE-based simulations using
reality-based methods.
B. Contributions
Motivated by the efforts of Okamura et al. [27] and Peterlik
et al. [14], the primary objective of this work is to propose,
demonstrate, and validate a method for reality-based enrichment
of haptic interactions in the context of constraint-based kines-
thetic feedback. It addresses the need for displaying complex
nonlinear contact forces experienced during surgery, as well as
the fundamental challenge of proving a continuous cutting force
during soft tissue removal in coarse FE-meshes. We argue that
the main beneﬁt of this method is that it simpliﬁes the focus
on critical haptic interactions in the development of interactive
surgical simulators, enabling safe training of dexterous motor
skills. Instead of comprehensive material parameter tuning,
characteristic contact forces can be used directly whether it has
a linear, nonlinear, or discontinuous shape.
Our method is based on mapping 3D contact forces, mea-
sured experimentally in an arbitrary reference frame, into a
one-dimensional (1D) characteristic force proﬁle. We refer to
this as a reference force, even though it consists of a force-
and displacement signal. Although we have applied a similar
principle in [33] to estimate the elastic moduli of the meniscus,
our novel contribution is to use this 1D reference force directly
in a 3D reality-based haptic rendering scenario. Speciﬁcally, the
experimental reference force (e.g. measured by a specialized
device [34]) can be rendered by extracting constraint directions
from the simulation contact forces (see Sections III-A and III-B),
and then combine the reference force and simulation contact
force into a new haptic force signal. A method for performing
this fusion using a Kalman ﬁlter has been introduced in [30], but
has not been demonstrated in a full 3D simulation environment.
We also present a practical contribution to transmit these forces
to a kinesthetic device with three degrees of freedom (DOF)
force feedback (see Section III-E).
We demonstrate our method in the case of arthroscopic portal
creation in the knee joint, in which a reality-based discontinuous
haptic force is displayed during cutting, as well as for arthro-
scopic meniscus examination, where an empirical nonlinear
haptic force is enabled without the need for hyperelastic con-
stitutive models. The method is implemented using the SOFA
framework [15] (see Section V). Reference force signals are
obtained from ex vivo arthroscopic knee surgery experiments
(see Section IV), and a secondary objective is to describe char-
acteristic force proﬁles from arthroscopic portal creation and
meniscus examination.
Finally, a user validation study (see Section VI) is presented
as another contribution, where we compare the performance
of experts and novices using our method with a conventional
linear-elastic haptic force. In addition to validating our method,
we investigate whether the shape of the haptic force signal
affects user performance in meniscus stiffness discrimination.
We show that experts have a ﬁner sensitivity than novices in
discriminating meniscus stiffness for both methods, indicating
construct validity and validating our method. We also show that
there is no statistical difference between a linear and nonlinear
force curve in meniscus stiffness discrimination. For arthro-
scopic portal creation, we ﬁnd no statistical difference in scalpel
insertion length between experts and novices. This is discussed
in Section VII.
III. METHOD: REALITY-BASED KINESTHETIC RENDERING
A. Extracting Simulation Contact Forces
Our method begins by extracting contact forces from the
interaction between an instrument and an FE-based deformable
or rigid object, as described in [14]. A short summary is pro-
vided for reference. CFEM is used in our method demonstration
because it can handle geometric nonlinearities of tissue defor-
mations. This is needed to produce accurate contact directions
as well as a convincing visual representation.
The two types of contacts concerned are holonomic con-
straints, Φ, meaning bilateral interaction laws such as attach-
ment and sliding, and non-holonomic constraints, Ψ, meaning
unilateral interaction laws such as contact and friction. These
can be denoted
Φ(x1, x2, . . .) = 0,
(1)
Ψ(x1, x2. . .) ≥0,
(2)
where x1, x2, . . . are the objects involved with the constraint. In
our method, we primarily address non-holonomic constraints,
but holonomic constraints are included in the description for
completeness. Assuming the deformation of soft tissue is mod-
elled using CFEM with implicit time integration, we get the
following general description:

M −dtB −dt2K




A
Δv =
dt · f(x(t), v(t)) + dt2Kv(t)



b
+dtHT λ.
(3)
where M is the mass matrix, K is the stiffness matrix, B is
the damping matrix, f(x(t), v(t)) is the sum of internal and
external forces not associated with mechanical interactions, dt
is the time step and v is the velocity. The term, HT λ, gives the
nodal forces to be applied to compensate for collision. For two
colliding objects, we have
A1Δv1 = b1 + dtH1
T λ
(4)
A2Δv2 = b2 + dtH2
T λ.
(5)
This is usually solved indirectly, by ﬁrst computing the free
motion (no constraints), and then minimizing interpenetration,
as described in [14].
From the interaction laws, the Jacobian, H, of the constraints
can be computed:
H1(x) =
 ∂Φ
∂x1
; ∂Ψ
∂x1
	
; H2(x) =
 ∂Φ
∂x2
; ∂Ψ
∂x2
	
(6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
572
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
This Jacobian represents the direction of the constraints, while
the forces are computed using the Lagrange multipliers, λ, in
constraintspace.Fromhere,thecontactforcesincartesianspace,
λ(x, y, z), can be extracted from the contact forces in constraint
space, λ(n, t1, t2):
λ(x, y, z) = HT λ(n, t1, t2)
(7)
where n is the force intensity in the normal direction and t1, t2
are the force intensities in the two tangential directions.
B. Decomposition of Contact Force and Projection of
Displacement
The contact force signal from the simulation in cartesian
space, as well as the experimentally measured reference force,
is next decomposed, and mapped from three to one dimension.
This is done to (i) extract the contact force direction from the
simulation and (ii) prepare the simulation- and reference forces
(and displacements) for reference-frame-free signal processing.
The experimental reference force follows the same procedure
for force decomposition and displacement projection as the
simulation contact force, but we limit the explanation to the
latter here.
Consider that for non-holonomic constraints, the force vector
will consist of a dominant direction. For example, this would
be nearly perpendicular to the surface for frictionless contact.
The contact force, λ(x, y, z), can then be decomposed into
magnitude, |λ|, and direction uλ, so that:
|λ| =

λ2x + λ2y + λ2z
(8)
uλ = λ
|λ|.
(9)
If needed, any of the normal or tangential directions could be
selected instead (λ(n, t1, t2)).
Characteristic haptic interactions are most generally de-
scribed by ordinary differential equations, of which reaction
force is computed from a linear- or nonlinear position-, velocity-
or acceleration dependent relationship. Therefore, the relevant
states of a simulation target object, δ, need to be extracted. The
most relevant target object will in many cases be the haptic
interaction point (HIP), of which could be attached to a virtual
surgical instrument model. We use this for our explanation.
However, we emphasize that states of the nodes in the de-
formable object involved with the contact also could serve as
target objects.
Because the length of the force direction unit vector is one
by deﬁnition, |uλ| = 1, the projected states, δ(x, y, z) along the
direction of force, uλ, can be calculated using the vector dot
product:
|δλ| = |δ(x, y, z)||uλ|cos(θ) = δ(x, y, z) · uλ.
(10)
We are interested in the projected states because these will
have the same direction as the contact force and the force-state
relationship can be described. For example, a unidirectional
force-displacement relationship for meniscus probing can be
modelled in 3D-space, as shown in Fig. 1. This produces a
Fig. 1.
As the instrument tip moves from point A to point B, the direction
of the resulting force vector for non-holonomic constraints will consist of a
dominant direction which is determined from the topology. Because the length
of the force direction unit vector is one, the projected states δ(x, y, z) can be
calculated using the vector dot product, as shown in (10).
meaningful 1D representation of the force-state relationship that
can be used for haptic modelling.
C. Generating a Reality-Based Characteristic Force Signal
The purpose of mapping the 3D representation of the con-
tact force to 1D is to prepare it for intuitive signal fusion or
replacement by an experimental characteristic reference signal.
In the reality-based haptic modelling framework, Okamura et al.
describe three main categories. These are (i) physics-based
models, such as ordinary differential equations, (ii) empirical
models, which could be a useful mathematical representation
without physical meaning, and (iii) a database of recorded inter-
actions, which are normally rendered by means of interpolation
methods [26]. Machine-learning based methods would often fall
into the second category. The goal of our method is to accept
characteristic force signals, fref, generated from any of these
methods. In this study, we consider an empirical reference force
measured by a force-torque sensor (FS), fFS, and position sensor
(PS), δPS, located in the surgical instrument. This reference force
is ﬁrst mapped to 1D using equations (8)–(10), or by selecting
the dominant direction. A simulation reference force, fref, can
then be generated e.g. using linear interpolation, so that:
fref,k = fFS,k + (fFS,k+1 −fFS,k)
δk −δPS,k
δPS,k+1 −δPS,k
,
(11)
or through an empirical model, such as shown in (23).
D. Signal Fusion
To provide a smooth fusion of the experimental reference-
and contact force signals, a Kalman ﬁlter observer is used.
Initial efforts on this method have been described in our previous
work [30], but have not been demonstrated in a 3D simulation
scenario. We emphasize that this step is optional, and it is possi-
ble to simply replace the simulation force signal by the reference
force signal. However, the advantage of using a Kalman ﬁlter for
signal fusion is that a somewhat “rough” characteristic reference
force signal can be used to generate a smooth haptic force signal.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BJELLAND et al.: HAPTIC RENDERING USING REALITY-BASED FORCE PROFILES IN SURGICAL SIMULATION
573
Algorithm 1: Kalman ﬁlter signal fusion.
1: Take measurement of CFEM forces, |λ|.
2: Assign uncertainty to CFEM force measurement, Rλ.
3: Perform prediction and correction based on λ.
4: Take measurement of reference signal, |fref|.
5: Assign uncertainty to reference signal measurement,
Rref.
6: Perform new prediction and correction based on |fref|.
A mathematical state-space representation of the haptic force
signal is formulated, and the haptic force, f, and impulse, j, at
time step k are selected as states. The state space representation
leads to the system matrix shown in (12).
A =

1
dt
0
1

(12)
As such, the a priori state estimate at time step k is
ˆx−
k =
ˆf
−
k
ˆj
−
k

=

1
dt
0
1
 ˆfk−1
ˆjk−1

.
(13)
As the force signal is sampled by alternating between setting
the measurement at time step k, zk, equal to |λ| or |fref|, the
measurement matrix is taken as shown in (14).
H =

1
0

(14)
The discrete Kalman ﬁlter, as presented in [35], is then imple-
mented using the prediction equations shown in (15) and (16).
ˆx−
k = Aˆxk−1
(15)
P−
k = APk−1AT + Q
(16)
Here, ˆxk−1 is the a posteriori estimate at time step k −1, P−
k is
the a priori estimate error covariance at time step k, Pk−1 is the
a posteriori estimate error covariance at time step k −1, and Q
is the system covariance matrix.
The measurement update equations are shown in (17), (18)
and (19), where Kk is the Kalman gain, ˆxk is the a posteriori
state estimate, Pk is the a posteriori estimate error covariance
at time step k, I is the identity matrix, and the rest as previously
deﬁned.
Kk = P−
k HT (HP−
k HT + R)−1
(17)
ˆxk = ˆx−
k + Kk(zk −Hˆx−
k )
(18)
Pk = (I −KkH)P−
k
(19)
The process noise covariance matrix, Q, and the measurement
noise variances associated with the simulation, Rλ and reality-
basedsignalRref,mustbesetinadvance.Theyarehereassumed
to be constant. The tuning of these parameters will determine
how much the reference force signal is trusted, and thereby
how much of it should be weighted in the haptic force signal
formation. They will also inﬂuence how much noise is removed.
The signal fusion is performed as shown in Algorithm 1.
E. Transmitting Force to Haptic Device
After the new haptic force signal magnitude, f, has been
generated either from (i) substitution of the magnitude of reality-
based reference force signal, |fref|, or (ii) by signal fusion (see
Section III-D), a new haptic force vector is generated from f
and the simulation contact force direction vector, uλ. We here
present a practical contribution for transmitting these forces to
a kinesthetic haptic device.
For contacts not involving topology change, the haptic force
vector is generated by multiplying the haptic force signal mag-
nitude with the contact force direction vector given at the current
time step, so that
fk = uλ,kfref,k.
(20)
For contacts involving topology change, a problem arises that
the contact force direction can potentially vary quite chaotically
fromonetimesteptothenext.Inthecaseoftetrahedralelements,
this is because collision detection algorithms base the contact
direction on the new normal directions of the element surface.
For coarse tetrahedral meshes, the direction changes can be
large. To overcome this, the initial contact force direction vector
before elements are removed, u0
λ, is used so that:
fk = u0
λfref,k.
(21)
This provides a justiﬁed representation for straight cuts. For
more intricate material removal operations, such as arthroscopic
meniscus shaving, the opposing direction of motion of the haptic
interaction point should be used instead, so that:
fk = δk
|δk|fref,k.
(22)
The force vector is ﬁnally sent to the haptic device driver for
haptic display.
IV. DATA COLLECTION EXPERIMENTS: EX VIVO
KNEE ARTHROSCOPY
A. Overview
This section describes experiments measuring characteristic
tool-tissue interactions for portal creation and meniscus exam-
ination in arthroscopic knee surgery. Ex vivo human cadaveric
knee joints were used. The research was approved by the Re-
gional Ethics Committee under reference 214114. The use of ca-
daveric specimens followed the principles underlined in the Dec-
laration of Helsinki. While we have previously obtained elastic
moduli of the menisci from the same knee specimens in [33], this
section presents novel contribution that describe force character-
istics from arthroscopic portal creation and meniscus probing,
measured by a force- and position sensor located in the surgical
instrument.
B. Specimen Sourcing and Preparation
Five cadaveric knee joints were obtained (Science Care, USA)
with a mean age of 71.8 years (68–78). The specimens, including
anatomical mid-femur to mid-tibia and ﬁbula, were sourced
from two right knees (RK1, RK2) and three left knees (LK1,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
574
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
Fig. 2.
Apparatus overview for ex vivo experiments. (a) Biomechanical in-
dentation testing of meniscus specimens using the Instron 34SC-5 test system.
(b) CAD-model of arthroscopic tracker instrument, including ATI Nano25 F/T
sensor, and ZED Mini stereo camera. The picture shows the setup for the
arthroscopic probe. For portal creation, a scalpel holder and Swan-Morton
Scalpel blade no.11 were used. (c) The arthroscopic data collection experiment
setup. Cadaveric knee specimens were attached to a bench using a vice. The
arthroscopic tracker instrument was used to measure surgeon interaction forces
and instrument position.
LK2, LK3). The donor cohort consists of three males and two
females, with a mean body mass index of 26.6 (17–33). Prior
surgeries on knee joints were considered as an exclusion criteria
during procurement. The knee joints were stored in a freezer
at −28oC and were thawed at room temperature for 24 hours
before arthroscopy.
C. Test Setup and Procedure
An arthroscopic tracker instrument was used to measure con-
tact forces and instrument pose [34]. The reported accuracy was
±1 mm for position, and 0.5◦for orientation. The sampling rate
was about 38 Hz. The force readings were bias-compensated and
then transformed from the sensor coordinate system to the global
coordinate system using the pose data. For meniscus probing ex-
periments, position readings were transformed from the camera
coordinate system to the instrument tool tip coordinate system.
The arthroscopic surgery was performed by an experienced
orthopedic surgeon. For each knee, a lateral and medial portal
was established using a scalpel, and the force and pose data
was saved to a CSV ﬁle. Next, a trocar and arthroscope were
inserted. The menisci (lateral and medial) were then examined
by two probings on the superior surface in the posterior, mid, and
anterior regions. This force and pose data was saved to a separate
CSV ﬁle. No water was injected into the knee. The procedure,
includingthearthroscopiccameraview, wasvideorecorded. The
different phases of the procedures could be veriﬁed by cross-
checking the time stamp in the video with the measured force-
pose data.
After arthroscopy, the menisci were extracted and biomechan-
ical indentation experiments were performed using an Instron
electromechanical testing system (model 34SC-5) to identify
the elastic modulus for each meniscus specimen, as described
in [33]. An apparatus overview is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 3.
Force signal components (x, y, z) for arthroscopic portal creation in
LK1, and the corresponding force signal magnitude (right). The locations of
skin puncture and joint capsule puncture are marked.
TABLE I
THE LATERAL PORTAL SKIN PUNCTURE FORCE (LSPF), LATERAL PORTAL
JOINT CAPSULE PUNCTURE FORCE (LJCPF), MEDIAL PORTAL SKIN PUNCTURE
FORCE (MSPF) AND MEDIAL PORTAL JOINT CAPSULE PUNCTURE FORCE
(MJCPF)
TABLE II
THE MEAN PEAK FORCE, |fpeak|, THE MEAN ELASTIC MODULUS, E, AND
MEAN POISSON’S RATIOS, ν, FOR THE ANTERIOR, MID AND POSTERIOR
REGIONS OF THE LATERAL AND MEDIAL MENISCI
D. Results
1) Portal Creation: A characteristic force curve of arthro-
scopic portal creation from the medial side of left knee 1 (LK1)
is shown in Fig. 3. The portal creation consisted of (i) skin tissue
deformation, (ii) skin puncture, (iii) joint capsule deformation,
(iv) joint capsule puncture. For the lateral portals, the mean skin
puncture force (LSPF) was 2.32 N, and the mean joint capsule
puncture force (LJCPF) was 8.63 N. For the medial portals, the
mean skin puncture force (MLSPF) was 2.38 N, and the mean
joint capsule puncture force (MJCPF) was 8.56 N (see Table I).
The length of the the arthroscopic scalpel blade was 40 mm.
2) Meniscus Probing: Fig. 4 shows the resulting force signal
from arthroscopic probing of the medial meniscus in left knee
1 (LK1). The peak forces measured in each of the respective
regions (anterior, mid, posterior) of the menisci (lateral, medial)
of the ﬁve knees are shown in Table II. In addition, the corre-
sponding elastic moduli (E and Poisson’s ratios, ν), from [33]
are included for comparison. Fig. 5 shows the region-wise
differences of the characteristic nonlinear force-displacement
curve measured by biomechanical indentation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BJELLAND et al.: HAPTIC RENDERING USING REALITY-BASED FORCE PROFILES IN SURGICAL SIMULATION
575
Fig. 4.
Force signal components (x,y,z) for arthroscopic meniscus probing
of the medial meniscus in left knee 1 (LK1) (top), and the corresponding force
signalmagnitude(bottom).Theprotocolwastwoprobingsintheposteriorregion
(P1, P2), two in the mid-region (M1, M2), and two in the anterior region (A1,
A2). The characteristic force peaks are indicated. A close-up of M1 and M2 is
shown to the right.
Fig. 5.
The characteristic force-displacement curve for 1 mm indentation of
meniscus tissue. Curves for the anterior, mid, and posterior regions are shown,
as well as the resulting identiﬁed elastic moduli.
V. SURGICAL SIMULATION IMPLEMENTATION: KNEE
ARTHROSCOPY IN SOFA
A. Biomechanical Simulation Model and Haptic Setup
A biomechanical simulation model of the knee joint was
developed in the Simulation Open Framework Architecture
(SOFA) [15]. Anatomical models were based on magnetic reso-
nance imaging models that were automatically segmented [36].
Computation models were modeled in CAD (Siemens NX,
Germany) using MRI models as a template, and subsequently
meshed using linear tetrahedral elements in GMSH [37]. The
mesh density was tuned to meet real-time requirements of
30 Hz for the physics thread on a laptop (11th Gen Intel Core
i5-11300H @ 3.10 GHz CPU, 8 GB memory). Surface meshes
extracted from the computation models were used as collision
models. For the lateral meniscus, the computation model con-
sisted of 1263 tetrahedral elements, the collision model 512
vertices,andthevisualmodel11722vertices.Forportalcreation,
the skin model consisted of 342 vertices for the visual and colli-
sion models, and 946 tetrahedral elements for the computation
model. Other visual models present in the portal creation scene
made up a total of about 1.7 million vertices.
Surgical scalpel and arthroscopic probe instrument models
were developed in CAD, and modeled as rigid bodies. The haptic
interaction point and virtual instrument model were connected
with springs, but the spring stiffness (translational and rota-
tional)wassetveryhightoavoiddisturbancewhenstudyingcon-
tact forces. Because the tool-tissue interactions were generally
for soft tissues, this was unproblematic for stability. A Geomagic
Touch haptic device (3D Systems, USA) was used for haptic
display. The Geomagic plugin was used in SOFA for handling
device kinematics and actuation. SofaPython3 was used for
accessing simulation variables and computing haptic forces.
The SofaPython3 plugin exposes C++ components available in
SOFA to Python. The haptic interaction point was selected as
the target object, δ, and displacement was selected as the state.
B. Application to Arthroscopic Portal Creation
To model arthroscopic portal creation, tissue removal and
haptic force modelling are needed. The skin was modeled as
a deformable object using CFEM, with E = 15 MPa. Other
anatomical models were included as visual representations only.
Topology change was modeled by removing elements in contact
with the virtual scalpel [23], as implemented in the SofaCarv-
ing plugin. Fixed boundary conditions were applied at the top
and bottom surfaces, as well as near the patellar tendon, and
lateral- and medial collateral ligaments. The carving distance
and material stiffness were tuned by trial and error.
The characteristic force curve of the arthroscopic portal cre-
ation was modeled by performing linear interpolation in the
measured force signal magnitude, as shown in Fig. 3. Because
the material removal simulation using CFEM does not produce
meaningful contact forces during cutting, the initial direction
of the contact force (before material removal) was used for the
haptic forces (see (21)). This collision detection was also used to
trigger the computation of the haptic force. Because there was
no meaningful simulation contact force, λ, signal fusion was
omitted and the reference force scaled to ﬁt the force capacity
of the haptic device was used.
The resulting reference signal magnitude, haptic force signal
magnitude, as well as force components of the haptic signal in
the global simulation reference frame, are shown in Fig. 6. The
simulation speed for the physics thread was about 25 Hz.
C. Application to Meniscus Examination
The characteristic force-displacement curve of meniscus ex-
amination was modelled as a nonlinear quadratic function fol-
lowing the characteristics shown in Fig. 5. The model takes in
the magnitude of the linear-elastic force signal, |λ|, from the
co-rotational ﬁnite element simulation, which uses the identiﬁed
elastic modulus, E, as described in section IV-D2. We deﬁne our
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
576
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
Fig. 6.
(a) Wireframe view of the knee model used in the arthroscopic portal
creation simulation. (b) Shaded view of the knee model. This is the user view.
(c) Simulated reference signal magnitude and scaled haptic force signal magni-
tude. The skin puncture and joint capsule puncture locations are indicated. (d)
The resulting force components of the haptic force signal in the global simulation
reference frame.
nonlinear force signal to be:
|fref| = β|λ|2,
(23)
where β is deﬁned as β =
1
fpeak , and fpeak is the force where
|fref| = |λ|. Ideally, we let fpeak = 10.77 N as shown in Table II.
However, for our demonstration, the haptic device is limited
to a maximum force of 3 N. Therefore, the user will apply
a larger deformation than expected because of the low force
feedback, and the computed virtual contact force, λ, will become
correspondingly higher. Thus the force where |fref| = |λ| needs
to be set higher. Mapping the force range (0 N, 10.77 N) →
(0 N, 3 N), we let fpeak = 10.77 N · 3 = 32.31 N. The reference
force signal, |fref|, was then fused with λ using the Kalman ﬁlter,
as described in Section III-D, with Rλ = 0.001 Rref = 0.774.
Finally, haptic force signal magnitude, |fhaptic|, is scaled to
ﬁt the force range of the haptic device to ensure stable hap-
tic display. The achieved refresh rate for the physics thread
was about 47 Hz during continuous contact. This effectively
computes a nonlinear characteristic force signal based on a
linear-elastic modulus. An example of resulting force signals
for elastic modulus, E = 3.18 MPa, is shown in Fig. 7.
VI. USER VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS: CONSTRUCT AND FACE
VALIDITY
A. Overview
This section describes user experiments that evaluate our
reality-based method compared to linear-elasticity based kines-
thetic feedback. We compare the performance of experts and
novices in an arthroscopic portal creation and a meniscus exam-
ination task with respect to construct validity. Construct validity
refers to discriminating between novice and expert performance,
and assumes that if the expert perform better than the novice, the
Fig. 7.
(a) Visualization of the contact between probe and meniscus in SOFA.
The elastic modulus of the meniscus was set to E = 3.18 MPa. (b) The resulting
contact forces, λ(x, y, z), from mechanical interaction between the probe and
meniscus tissue. (c) The SOFA contact force magnitude, |λ|, compared to the
nonlinear reference signal, |fref |, and fused force signal, |fhaptic|. (d) The
haptic signal scaled to the force range of the haptic device.
simulationreﬂectsskillsthatresemblesurgicalskills[3].Finally,
some aspects on face validity, which is a subjective qualitative
measure of how well the simulation represents actual surgery, is
included.
B. Study Design
Handling of personal data according to GDPR was considered
by the Norwegian Agency for Shared Services in Education and
Research (Sikt) under reference 599785. All participant data
was made anonymous. Informed consent was obtained from all
participants.
24 participants were recruited to participate in the study, of
which 12 (10 males, 2 females) were experienced orthopedic
surgeons (> 1 year arthroscopy experience), and 12 (8 males,
4 females) had no prior surgical experience. Experts were re-
cruited from two different hospitals. The mean age was 43.6
years in the expert group and 37.2 years in the novice group. For
the experts, the mean experience with arthroscopic surgery was
11.8 years. The experiment procedure consisted of three main
phases: familiarization, meniscus examination, and knee portal
creation. The setup is shown in Fig. 8.
1) Familiarization: The purpose of the familiarization phase
was to reduce familiarization bias. Participants were given in-
structions on how to operate the haptic device and interact with
tissue in the virtual environment. They were then invited to
explore a knee model consisting of rigid bones (femur, patella,
tibia, ﬁbula), deformable meniscus tissue (lateral and medial),
deformable ligaments (ACL and PCL), and visual models (LCL,
PCL, muscle). Participants were encouraged to feel the differ-
ence between rigid and deformable objects.
2) Meniscus Examination: The purpose of the meniscus ex-
amination phase was to distinguish between various levels of
meniscus stiffness. This exercise is clinically relevant because
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BJELLAND et al.: HAPTIC RENDERING USING REALITY-BASED FORCE PROFILES IN SURGICAL SIMULATION
577
Fig. 8.
User experiment setup with Geomagic Touch haptic device and simu-
lation scenes developed in SOFA v.22.06. Participants ﬁlled out a paper survey
during the experiment.
TABLE III
DURING PHASE 2), PARTICIPANTS WERE ASKED TO IDENTIFY WHETHER THEY
PERCEIVED THE HIGHER OR LOWER MODULUS AS THE STIFFEST.
it represents distinguishing between healthy and degenerative
meniscus tissue in diagnostic knee arthroscopy. The difference
threshold (DT) was used as a metric, and established for both
the linear-elastic and reality-based methods. The DT indicates
a point at which participants can no longer reliably distinguish
between stiffness levels, and was taken as the midpoint of a
psychometric function spanning from chance to perfect per-
formance, according to [38]. Following construct validity, we
hypothesize that experts have ﬁner sensitivity than novices for
both methods. For this probing task, we emphasize that the
goal is not to improve sensitivity but to improve realism. We
therefore use an exercise requiring ﬁne sensitivity to show that
the reality-based method can achieve the same sensitivity as a
linear-elastic method, which is considered the gold standard.
Thus, we hypothesize no difference in sensitivity between the
two methods.
Five different elastic moduli were included based on our ex
vivo modulus measurements as well as reported decrease in
modulus based on degenerative arthrosis development [6], [33].
The moduli were 5.05 MPa, 4.24 MPa, 3.85 MPa, 2.67 MPa
and 1.41 MPa. The moduli were combined to form ﬁve different
difﬁculty levels based on differences in elastic moduli. A higher
difﬁculty was associated with a smaller difference in modulus.
An overview is shown in Table III.
Participants were shown two visually identical lateral menisci
in the simulation environment and asked to report in a paper
survey which meniscus they perceived as the stiffest. The test
design was a three-option forced choice, with options being
meniscus A (left), meniscus B (right), or equally stiff. The
test was repeated ten times. In each participant group (experts
and novices), half of the participants experienced reality-based
TABLE IV
STATISTICAL COMPARISON OF DT USING MANN-WHITNEY U TEST.
kinesthetic feedback (see section V-C), and the other half was
from linear-elastic based kinesthetic feedback. User force, dis-
placement, and decision time were automatically recorded in
the software. After the ten tests, experts were invited to ﬁll out
a paper survey regarding how similar the simulation was to the
actual procedure. The survey included Likert-scale questions
rating haptic feedback and visual representation on a scale from
one to ﬁve, as well as free-text answers.
3) Knee Portal Creation: The purpose of the third task was
to practice knee portal creation using a scalpel. For this proce-
dure, kinesthetic feedback is missing in existing commercial
arthroscopy simulators. Following construct validity, we hy-
pothesize that experts insert the scalpel a shorter distance than
novices after puncture occurs.
Participants were asked to create one medial and one lateral
arthroscopic portal in a knee model using a virtual scalpel (see
section V-B). The instructor explained that the task was to insert
the scalpel as a stab incision and that the users would feel a
‘pop’ when the joint capsule was punctured. Further, it was
explained that the participants would need to apply enough force
to puncture the joint capsule, but take care not to damage internal
structures. The procedure was repeated three times, but only
the last two experiments were included to reduce familiarity
bias. Scalpel insertion length was automatically measured using
the software. Experts were invited to ﬁll out a paper survey
with Likert-scale questions and free-text answers regarding the
realism of the simulation after completion.
C. Results
1) Meniscus Examination Difference Threshold: Statistical
analysis of the survey data was performed in Python (v3.11.2)
using the Scipy statistics module. The data failed to meet the
normality assumption upon visual histogram inspection. The
Mann-Whitney U test was therefore chosen to compare data.
The mean identiﬁcation score for all four groups was 95.8%
for level 1 (3.64 MPa difference in stiffness). The groups were
linear-elastic novice (LN), reality-based novice (RN), linear-
elastic expert (LE), and reality-based expert (RE). As such, level
1 was used as a reference of comparison with the other difﬁculty
levels.
The results are shown in Table IV. All groups could identify
level 2 with more than 90% accuracy. For level 3, experts per-
formed better than novices in the linear group, but the difference
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
578
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
Fig. 9.
Psychometric functions ﬁtted to survey data. The LE group had the
lowest DT (highest sensitivity), and the LN group had the highest DT (lowest
sensitivity).
TABLE V
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR DECISION TIME, MEAN VIRTUAL CONTACT
FORCE AND MAXIMUM DISPLACEMENT FOR THE GROUPS EXPERT
LINEAR-ELASTIC (LE), EXPERT REALITY-BASED (RE), NOVICE
LINEAR-ELASTIC (LN) AND NOVICE REALITY-BASED (RN)
for novices was not signiﬁcant (p = 0.06, U = 30.0). There was
a signiﬁcant difference between level 4 and level 1 for all groups
(p < 0.05, U = 36.0; 36.0; 33.0; 31.5). This indicates that no
groups could distinguish between differences in modulus less
than 0.81 MPa. The difference threshold was therefore higher
than 0.81 MPa for all groups. For no difference in stiffness,
the mean score was higher than level 4 for all groups. This
indicates that it was easier to identify equal stiffness than small
differences.
A psychometric Sigmoid function for each group was ﬁtted
based on the data according to [38]. The curves are shown in
Fig. 9. The lower asymptote represents the probability of a
correct answer by chance from the three-option forced choice
survey. The difference threshold (DT) was found to be 1.80 MPa
for LN, 1.47 MPa for RN, 0.99 MPa for LE, and 1.39 MPa for
RE. A lower DT (ﬁner sensitivity) for experts in both the linear-
elastic and reality-based groups indicates construct validity.
2) Meniscus Examination - Decision Time, Force Use and
Deformation: Decision times, mean force, and maximum probe
displacements were automatically measured during the experi-
ments. The decision time was deﬁned as the time from ﬁrst con-
tact until the end. Statistical analysis was performed to compare
groups LN, RN, LE, and RE. The data did not exhibit deviance
from normality by visual inspection. A two-way ANOVA test in
Python was therefore used.
Descriptive results are shown in Table V. Results show
that experts had signiﬁcantly shorter decision times than
novices (F(1,196) = 12.34, p < 0.05, η2
partial = 0.06), and that
experts used signiﬁcantly less force (F(1,159748) = 141.88, p <
0.05, η2
partial < 0.01). This supports construct validity.
Further, the decision times were signiﬁcantly shorter
for reality-based haptics compared to linear-elastic hap-
tics (F(1,196) = 6.12, p < 0.05, η2
partial = 0.03). For max dis-
placements, reality-based groups (combined) had signiﬁcantly
smaller probe displacements than the linear-elastic group
(F(1,31276) = 298.99, p < 0.05, η2
partial = 0.01). However, this
was primarily due to the novice group, and this trend was not
apparent in the expert group.
3) Meniscus Examination - Face Validity: A qualitative as-
sessment of the face validity was performed from Likert survey
results and free text answers in the expert group. From the
ﬁve-point Likert survey, the linear-elastic based haptic feedback
obtained a mean score of 4.0, and the mean score for the reality-
based haptic feedback was 3.4. For the visual representation,
the scores were respectively 3.3 and 4.0 in the linear-elastic
and reality-based groups. For the free text answers, four experts
commented that missed collision detection with “pop-through”
was disturbing (both LE and RB groups). Three commented
that there was too much visual deformation (both groups).
Two reported that visual depth perception was challenging, and
several others also commented on this to the instructor. Five in
the LE group and four in the RB group reported that the haptic
feedback was very good. Two in each group reported that the
haptic feedback was realistic.
4) Portal Creation - Scalpel Insertion Length: For knee por-
tal creation, the scalpel insertion length was statistically com-
pared for experts and novices. The data did not exhibit deviance
from normality by visual inspection, and a paired T-test was
therefore used for comparison. The mean insertion length was
19.91 ± 15.43 mm for the novice group, and 21.25 ± 15.03 mm
for the expert group. There was no statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the groups (p = 0.85). The length of the virtual
scalpel blade was 40 mm.
5) Portal Creation - Face Validity: A qualitative assessment
of face validity for portal creation was performed from the
ﬁve-point Likert survey and free text answers from experts.
The haptic feedback obtained a mean score of 2.4, and the
visual representation obtained 2.3. From the free text answers,
eight out of twelve experts reported that they struggled with
sense of depth. Three reported that visual cuts removed too
much material. For the haptic feedback, three reported that the
joint capsule puncture felt clear, but the skin puncture was less
distinct. The general feedback was that excessive visual tissue
removal dominated the overall impression, but haptic feedback
functioned well on its own.
VII. DISCUSSION
Considering the meniscus examination task in the user vali-
dation study, which represents general soft tissue contact, the
ﬁndings indicate that the difference threshold was lower for
experts than novices in both the linear-elastic and reality-based
groups. This indicates a ﬁner sensitivity for experts. Also,
experts used less force and had shorter decision times than
novices. This supports construct validity for both methods.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BJELLAND et al.: HAPTIC RENDERING USING REALITY-BASED FORCE PROFILES IN SURGICAL SIMULATION
579
When comparing haptic methods for meniscus examination,
experts had slightly ﬁner sensitivity using the linear-elastic
method (0.99 MPa) than the reality-based method (1.39 MPa).
In contrast, novices had slightly ﬁner sensitivity with the
reality-based method (1.47 MPa) than the linear-elastic method
(1.80 MPa). From this one might hypothesize that the proposed
reality-based method confers advantages to novices compared to
experts. However, qualitative feedback did not provide evidence
to support this. In addition, the Mann-Whitney test did not reveal
statistical differences between the methods. The aim was to
show that the reality-based method provides stable nonlinear
kinestheticfeedbackmatchingthesensitivityofthelinear-elastic
method, not to enhance stiffness discrimination sensitivity. A
limitation of the user study design was that it focused on experts
and novices and did not consider intermediate levels. Integrating
participants with intermediate skill levels, such as junior resident
physicians, could potentially reveal differences in sensitivity
between methods.
The arthroscopic portal creation task demonstrated continu-
ous kinesthetic feedback during soft tissue removal. Here, the
difference between experts and novices was not statistically
signiﬁcant (p = 0.85). This could be attributed to a coarse ﬁ-
nite element mesh which led to minor inconsistencies between
visual and haptic display during tissue removal. Notably, visual
perception has been shown to dominate haptic perception, and
inconsistencies should be carefully avoided [39]. One limitation
of this method is that visual material removal depends on how
far the instrument penetrates the tissue, and tissue stiffness and
boundary conditions also affect instrument travel. While it is
possible to adjust this factor to align visual and haptic feedback,
a more effective approach might be to trigger visual material
removal directly based on haptic force limits. Alternatively,
a ﬁner mesh would likely yield better results. As such, user
validation was inconclusive in demonstrating construct validity
for the entire simulation setup (visual and haptic). However,
haptic feedback functioned well on its own, with kinesthetic
force curves consistent with experimental measurements, and
without reported user issues.
The simulation setup was limited by the force capacity of the
hapticdevice(3N)andtherefreshrateofthephysicsthread.This
was apparent from qualitative feedback from the expert group.
Oneparticipant(male,42yearsold)explainedtherewasmorevi-
sual deformation in meniscus examination than expected, which
was a direct consequence of the force capacity and stability of
the haptic device. Similar comments were received from experts
in both the linear-elasticity and reality-based groups, albeit
the deformation was signiﬁcantly smaller (p < 0.05) for the
reality-based method. The mean maximum displacement was
3.3 mm in the linear-elasticity groups (combined), and 2.7 mm
for the reality-based groups (combined). Using the reality-based
method, visual deformation can be further limited by setting
fpeak to a smaller value. However, this requires higher refresh
rates to avoid stability issues [10]. It is likely that a haptic device
with a higher force capacity would improve the face validity of
the simulation. With a mean peak force of 10.77 N in meniscus
probing experiments, only three commercial kinesthetic devices
meet this force requirement according to Haptipedia [40]. These
are the Force Dimension Omega, Phantom Premium 1.5 high
force, and Haption Virtuose 6D high force. However, consid-
ering functional task alignment of arthroscopic tasks, such as
learning tactile sensations and dexterous motor skills of special-
ized surgical equipment, surgery-like devices, such as Follou
Haptics could be equally important.
Considering the computational cost of the proposed reality-
based method, there was only a minor reduction in speed. For
the meniscus probing task, the speed was about 80 Hz when the
probe was moving in free space. During continuous contact us-
ing only the linear-elastic force feedback, the speed was reduced
to about 52 Hz. Further, by introducing contact force extraction
in Python (see (7)), the speed was reduced to about 47 Hz. Fi-
nally, by introducing nonlinear force computation (23), Kalman
ﬁlter sensor fusion (Algorithm 1) and transmitting forces to
haptic device (20), the speed remained at about 47 Hz. It shall
be noted that contact force extraction, which represented the
majority of the speed reduction, was implemented in Python, and
that C++ implementation could minimize this speed reduction.
This clearly demonstrates that our method did not introduce a
substantial loss of computation speed.
A limitation of this study is that it did not consider multimodal
haptics, for example by including vibrotactile display of contact
andslipvibrations.Otherstudieshavedemonstratedanimprove-
ment in perceived realism by displaying transient vibrations in
combination with kinesthetic feedback during object contact, for
exampleduringtapping[41],slidingandpuncture[42],andbone
drilling [28]. These vibrations can be conveyed via the motors of
the kinesthetic device and can be seamlessly incorporated into
the proposed method. One challenge of the data collection setup
in this paper is maintaining an adequate sampling rate for such
vibrations.
A challenge in adopting the proposed reality-based method
could be system integration. To mitigate this, we have made
a Python implementation openly available on GitHub [43].
Simulation scenes used in the user validation study are also
available.
For future work, the method should be evaluated for char-
acteristic force signals from other surgical maneuvers such as
shaving or suturing the meniscus, and from other methods, such
as neural network models. Also, exploration of the method
within the position-based dynamics framework is interesting
because higher refresh rates can be combined with reality-based
force signals, thereby simultaneously addressing limitations in
computation speed and characteristics of the haptic force.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a reality-based method for the enrich-
ment of kinesthetic haptic rendering in surgical simulations. The
method was compared to linear-elastic kinesthetic feedback in
arthroscopic meniscus examination through a user experiment
with experts and novices. The difference thresholds were found
to be 1.80 MPa (novice, linear-elastic), 1.47 MPa (novice,
reality-based), 0.99 MPa (expert, linear-elastic), and 1.39 MPa
(expert, reality-based). Experts used signiﬁcantly less force and
had shorter decision times (p < 0.05), supporting construct
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
580
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2025
validity for both haptic feedback approaches. We remark that
a well-tuned linear elastic simulation could be sufﬁcient for
meniscus stiffness discrimination, but is limited to a linear force
response. The reality-based method also demonstrated continu-
ous kinesthetic feedback free of instabilities during arthroscopic
portalcreation,butuservalidationwasinconclusiveduetominor
inconsistencies with visual and haptic integration. The beneﬁt
of the presented method is that it simpliﬁes procedure-speciﬁc
haptic rendering in surgical simulation development.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Hugo Talbot, Paul Baksic, and
the SOFA consortium for support with simulator development.
The authors would also like to thank Alf Inge Hellevik and
Eivind Inderhaug for help with organizing user experiments,
and the volunteers who participated. Carl Petter Kulseng and
Kjell-Inge Gjesdal at NordicCAD are recognized for providing
the anatomical models used in this project.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Chae, S.-W. Jung, and H.-S. Park, “In vivo biomechanical measurement
and haptic simulation of portal placement procedure in shoulder arthro-
scopic surgery,” PLoS One, vol. 13, no. 3, Mar. 2018, Art. no. e0193736.
[2] Y. Hui, O. Saﬁr, A. Dubrowski, and H. Carnahan, “What skills should
simulation training in arthroscopy teach residents? A focus on resident
input,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 945–953,
Nov. 2013.
[3] R. M. Frank, “Editorial commentary: Arthroscopic simulators—Are we
there yet?,” Arthroscopy: J. Arthroscopic Related Surg., vol. 35, no. 8,
pp. 2391–2393, Aug. 2019.
[4] E. M. Overtoom, T. Horeman, F.-W. Jansen, J. Dankelman, and H. W.
R. Schreuder, “Haptic feedback, force feedback, and force-sensing in
simulation training for laparoscopy: A systematic overview,” J. Surg.
Educ., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 242–261, Jan. 2019.
[5] C. Pacchierotti and D. Prattichizzo, “Cutaneous/Tactile haptic feedback in
robotic teleoperation: Motivation, survey, and perspectives,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 40, pp. 978–998, 2024.
[6] K. M. Fischenich, J. Lewis, K. A. Kindsfater, T. S. Bailey, and T. L.
Haut Donahue, “Effects of degeneration on the compressive and tensile
properties of human meniscus,” J. Biomech., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 1407–1411,
Jun. 2015.
[7] U. Erden, M. A. Gromski, S. De, and D. Demirel, “Preliminary valida-
tion of the virtual bariatric endoscopic simulator,” iGIE, vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 453–462, Dec. 2024.
[8] J. Bender, M. Müller, and M. Macklin, “Position-based simulation
methods in computer graphics,” in EUROGRAPHICS Tutorials, Zürich,
Switzerland: The Eurographics Association, pp. 1–32, 2015.
[9] M. Freutel, H. Schmidt, L. Dürselen, A. Ignatius, and F. Galbusera, “Finite
element modeling of soft tissues: Material models, tissue interaction and
challenges,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 363–372, 2014.
[10] J. Colgate, M. Stanley, and J. Brown, “Issues in the haptic display of tool
use,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. Hum. Robot Interact.
Cooperative Robots, vol. 3, Aug. 1995, pp. 140–145.
[11] B. Hannaford and A. M. Okamura, “Haptics,” in Springer Handbook of
Robotics, B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2008, pp. 719–739.
[12] C. Zilles and J. Salisbury, “A constraint-based God-object method for
haptic display,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. Hum.
Robot Interact. Cooperative Robots, vol. 3, Aug. 1995, pp. 146–151.
[13] C. Duriez, F. Dubois, A. Kheddar, and C. Andriot, “Realistic haptic
rendering of interacting deformable objects in virtual environments,” IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 36–47, Jan./Feb. 2006.
[14] I. Peterlik, M. Nouicer, C. Duriez, S. Cotin, and A. Kheddar, “Constraint-
based haptic rendering of multirate compliant mechanisms,” IEEE Trans.
Haptics, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 175–187, Jul./Sep. 2011.
[15] F. Faure et al., “SOFA: A multi-model framework for interactive physical
simulation,” Soft Tissue Biomech. Model. Comput. Assist. Surg., 2012,
vol. 11, pp. 283–321.
[16] O. Bjelland et al., “Toward a digital twin for arthroscopic knee surgery: A
systematic review,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 45029–45052, 2022.
[17] A. C. Abraham, C. R. Edwards, G. M. Odegard, and T. L. H. Donahue,
“Regional and ﬁber orientation dependent shear properties and anisotropy
of bovine meniscus,” J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., vol. 4, no. 8,
pp. 2024–2030, Nov. 2011.
[18] P. Shull, K. Bark, and M. Cutkosky, “Skin nonlinearities and their effect on
user perception for rotational skin stretch,” in Proc. IEEE Haptics Symp.,
Mar. 2010, pp. 77–82.
[19] B. Smith, F. D. Goes, and T. Kim, “Stable Neo-Hookean ﬂesh simulation,”
ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 12:1–12:15, Mar. 2018.
[20] N. Schulmann, S. Cotin, and I. Peterlik, “The effect of discretization on
parameter identiﬁcation. Application to patient-speciﬁc simulations,” in
Proc. Comput. Methods, Imag. Visual. Biomech. Biomed. Eng., 2020,
pp. 237–247.
[21] M. Kaluschke, R. Weller, N. Hammer, L. Pelliccia, M. Lorenz,
and G. Zachmann, “Realistic haptic feedback for material removal
in medical simulations,” in Proc. IEEE Haptics Symp., Mar. 2020,
pp. 920–926.
[22] H. Courtecuisse, H. Jung, J. Allard, C. Duriez, D. Y. Lee, and S. Cotin,
“GPU-based real-time soft tissue deformation with cutting and haptic
feedback,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 159–168, Dec.
2010.
[23] M. Bro-Nielsen, “Finite element modeling in surgery simulation,” in Proc.
IEEE, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 490–503, Mar. 1998.
[24] E. Burman, S. Claus, P. Hansbo, M. G. Larson, and A. Massing, “CutFEM:
Discretizing geometry and partial differential equations,” Int. J. Numer.
Methods Eng., vol. 104, no. 7, pp. 472–501, 2015.
[25] H. P. Bui, S. Tomar, and S. P. A. Bordas, “Corotational cut ﬁnite element
method for real-time surgical simulation: Application to needle insertion
simulation,” Comput. Methods Appl. Mechan. Eng., vol. 345, pp. 183–211,
Mar. 2019.
[26] A. Okamura, M. Cutkosky, and J. Dennerlein, “Reality-based models for
vibration feedback in virtual environments,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tron., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 245–252, Sep. 2001.
[27] A. Okamura, C. Simone, and M. O’Leary, “Force modeling for needle
insertion into soft tissue,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 10,
pp. 1707–1716, Oct. 2004.
[28] Q. Ha-Van, H. Schwendinger, Y. Kim, and M. Harders, “Design and char-
acterization of an actuated drill mockup for orthopedic surgical training,”
IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 655–667, Oct. 2020.
[29] A. Galvan, A. K. Da Costa, J. Shields, K. Kho, and A. M. Fey, “Haptic
simulator for trocar insertion training,” in Proc. IEEE World Haptics Conf.,
Jul. 2021, pp. 397–402.
[30] O. Bjelland, M. D. Pedersen, M. Steinert, and R. T. Bye, “Intraoperative
data-based haptic feedback for arthroscopic partial meniscectomy punch
simulation,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 107269–107282, 2022.
[31] F. Picard, A. H. Deakin, P. E. Riches, K. Deep, and J. Baines, “Computer
assisted orthopaedic surgery: Past, present and future,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 72, pp. 55–65, Oct. 2019.
[32] J. B. Joolee and S. Jeon, “Data-driven haptic texture modeling and ren-
dering based on deep spatio-temporal networks,” IEEE Trans. Haptics,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 62–67, Jan. 2022.
[33] B. Rasheed et al., “Intraoperative identiﬁcation of patient-speciﬁc elastic
modulus of the meniscus during arthroscopy,” Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed., vol. 254, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 108269.
[34] O. Bjelland, L. I. Hatledal, R. T. Bye, and M. Steinert, “Implementation
and evaluation of an arthroscopic tracker system for intraoperative motion
tracking and force registration,” in Proc. 37th ECMS Int. Conf. Model.
Simul., Jun. 2023, pp. 459–465.
[35] G. Welch and G. Bishop, “An introduction to the Kalman ﬁlter,” University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, White Paper, 1997. [Online]. Available:
https://perso.crans.org/club-krobot/doc/kalman.pdf
[36] C. P. S. Kulseng, V. Nainamalai, E. Grøvik, J.-T. Geitung, A. ˚Arøen,
and K.-I. Gjesdal, “Automatic segmentation of human knee anatomy
by a convolutional neural network applying a 3D MRI protocol,” BMC
Musculoskelet. Disord., vol. 24, no. 1, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 41.
[37] C. Geuzaine and J.-F. Remacle, “GMSH: A three-dimensional ﬁnite ele-
ment mesh generator with built-in pre- and post-processing facilities,” Int.
J. Numer. Methods Eng. 79, no. 11, pp. 1309–1331, 2009.
[38] L. A. Jones and H. Z. Tan, “Application of psychophysical techniques
to haptic research,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 268–284,
Jul.–Sep. 2013.
[39] Y. Xu, S. O’Keefe, S. Suzuki, and S. L. Franconeri, “Visual inﬂuence
on haptic torque perception,” Perception, vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 862–870,
Jul. 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BJELLAND et al.: HAPTIC RENDERING USING REALITY-BASED FORCE PROFILES IN SURGICAL SIMULATION
581
[40] H. Seiﬁet al., “Haptipedia: Accelerating haptic device discovery to support
interaction & engineering design,” in Proc. CHI Conf. Hum. Factors
Comput. Syst., May 2019, pp. 1–12.
[41] K.J.Kuchenbecker,J.Fiene,andG.Niemeyer,“Improvingcontactrealism
through event-based haptic feedback,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Mar./Apr. 2006.
[42] A. Okamura, J. Dennerlein, and R. Howe, “Vibration feedback models for
virtual environments,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., vol. 1,
May 1998, pp. 674–679.
[43] B. Øystein, “Reality-based haptics for SOFA,” Apr. 2025. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/CHAOS-AES/Reality-Based-Haptics-For-
SOFA
Øystein Bjelland received the M.Sc. degree in me-
chanical engineering from the Norwegian University
of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim,
Norway, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in engineer-
ing cybernetics from NTNU, ˚Alesund, Norway, in
2025. From 2016 to 2020, he was a Mechanical De-
sign Engineer of applied research and development
with Prototech AS, working with Subsea Robotics,
Flow Measurement Technology, Fuel Cell Systems
for Space Applications, and Metal Additive Manufac-
turing. Since 2020, he has been a Researcher with the
Cyber-Physical Systems Lab, NTNU, and is also with Aalesund Biomechanics
Laboratory and TrollLabs. His research interests include digital twins, mecha-
tronic systems, and biomechanics, and focuses on advancing haptic technology
for interactive surgical training simulations in orthopedic applications.
Bismi Rasheed graduated in civil engineering from
the University of Calicut, Malappuram, Kerala, India,
in 2014, the M.Tech degree in computer aided struc-
tural analysis and design from the Cochin University
of Science and Technology, Kochi, Kerala, India, in
2017. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. de-
greewiththeDepartmentofICTandNaturalSciences
at NTNU, ˚Alesund, Norway. From 2018 to 2020,
she was a Research Scholar with the Department of
Applied Mechanics, Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, Chennai, India. She is also with the Cyber-
Physical Systems Laboratory, NTNU ˚Alesund and ˚Alesund Biomechanics Labo-
ratory. Her research interests include computational modeling, solid mechanics,
and biomechanics. Current research interests focus on biomechanical character-
ization, soft tissue deformation modeling, and surgical simulation.
Intissar Cherif received the Bachelor of Science and
master’s degrees in computer science: Images and
artiﬁcial life from the University of Mohamed Khider,
Biskra, Algeria. She is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in computer science with the University
of Paris Saclay, IBISC Lab, France, in cotutelle with
the University of Mohamed Khider, LESIA Lab, Al-
geria. Her research focuses on the Since 2024, she
has been a Teaching and Research Assistant with the
University of Évry - Paris Saclay, where she Teaches
computer science and advanced programming while
also supervising technology projects. Her research interests include enhancing
training effectiveness in technical ﬁelds through immersive simulation tech-
nologies and ﬁdelity of haptic feedback in virtual reality simulators for learning
technical gestures. She was the recipient of the Eiffel Excellence Scholarship,
awarded by the French Government to fund her ongoing Ph.D. degree.
Andreas Fagerhaug Dalen received the M.D. de-
gree from the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway, in 2013.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in orthopedics. He is also an Orthopedic Surgeon
with ˚Alesund General Hospital. Since 2018, he has
been the Head of ˚Alesund Biomechanics Laboratory
( ˚ABL), where his research is focused on ankle frac-
turesandbiomechanics.Hisresearchinterestsinclude
biomechanics and treatment of injuries in shoulders,
knees, and ankles.
Amine Chellali received the M.Sc. degree in robotics
from the Ecole Centrale de Nantes, Nantes, France,
in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in HCI from the
University of Nantes, Nantes, in 2009. From 2009
to 2011, he was a Research Assistant with the Re-
search Institute on Communication and Cybernetics
of Nantes (IRCCyN). From 2011 to 2012, he moved
to the U.S. to work as a Postdoctoral Associate in
ergonomics with Remote Environments Laboratory
(EREL), Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA and
then as a Research Associate with the Interactive
Surgical Systems Laboratory (ISSyL), Harvard Medical School. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Engineering, Univer-
sity of Evry Paris-Saclay (France) and also a Co-Leader of the Interaction,
Mixed Reality, and Assistive Robotics (IRA2) with IBISC Laboratory. His
research interests include simulator ﬁdelity, haptic interactions, collaborative
virtual environments, and the transfer and evaluation of human skills, and main
applicationsareintheﬁeldofsurgicaltraining.Hewastherecipientoftheseveral
grants for his research on VR simulation from the French National Research
Agency.
Martin Steinert was born in Dresden, Germany. He
received the B.A., M.A., and Ph.D. (Dr.rer.pol) de-
grees in technology management from the University
of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland. He has been an
Assistant Professor with the University of Fribourg,
Switzerland, Visiting Scholar with MIT, Cambridge,
MA, USA, and Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA, before changing full time to Stanford Univer-
sity as the Deputy Director with the Center for Design
Research (CDR), and an Assistant Professor (Acting)
of mechanical engineering with Stanford University.
Since 2013, he has been a Full Professor of engineering design with the Depart-
ment of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (MTP), Norwegian University
of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway. His research interests
include the fuzzy front end of new product development and design: optimizing
the intersection of engineering design thinking and new product development,
mechatronics/sensors, and computer sciences (especially machine learning). A
special focus is on conceptual development and alpha prototype generation of
high-performance requirements and on experimental tools and setups. He has
more than 200 publications registered in Google Scholar, as of August 2021.
Dr. Steinert was the recipient of the several prizes in both teaching and research.
He has been a member of the Norwegian Academy of Technological Sciences
(NTVA) since 2015.
Robin T. Bye (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in
˚Alesund, Norway, in 1979. He received the B.Eng.
(with Hons.), M.Eng.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in elec-
trical engineering from the University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia, in 2004, 2005, and 2009,
respectively. Since 2008, he has been with the De-
partment of ICT and Natural Sciences (IIR), Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology (NTNU),
˚Alesund, Norway, and became a Full Professor in
2020. He also Heads the Undergraduate Automation
Engineering Programme and the Cyber-Physical Sys-
tems Laboratory. His research interests include the broad areas of cybernetics,
artiﬁcial intelligence, neuroengineering, and engineering didactics. Prof. Bye
was the recipient of the Goodeve Medal by The Operational Research Society
in 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Institute of Science Tokyo. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 14:51:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
