Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 345 (2019) 183–211
www.elsevier.com/locate/cma
Corotational cut finite element method for real-time surgical
simulation: Application to needle insertion simulation
Huu Phuoc Buia,b,∗, Satyendra Tomara, Stéphane P.A. Bordasa,c,d,∗∗
a Institute of Computational Engineering, University of Luxembourg, Faculty of Sciences Communication and Technology, Luxembourg
b Laboratoire de Mathématiques de Besançon (LMB) UMR CNRS 6623, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
c Institute of Mechanics and Advanced Materials, School of Engineering, Cardiff University, UK
d Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
Received 23 March 2018; received in revised form 21 September 2018; accepted 12 October 2018
Available online 12 November 2018
Highlights
• CutFEM enables real-time simulation of needle insertion in soft tissue.
• Optimal convergence rates are achieved.
• The method captures the geometry in the limit where the mesh tends to zero.
• A simple numerical integration algorithm is proposed.
• The method provides force versus displacement insertion profiles which are comparable to fitted finite element methods.
Abstract
We present the corotational cut Finite Element Method (FEM) for real-time surgical simulation. The only requirement of the
proposed method is a background mesh, which is not necessarily conforming to the boundaries/interfaces of the simulated object.
The details of the surface, which can be directly obtained from binary images, are taken into account by a multilevel embedding
algorithm which is applied to elements of the background mesh that are cut by the surface. Dirichlet boundary conditions can be
implicitly imposed on the surface using Lagrange multipliers, whereas traction or Neumann boundary conditions, which is/are
applied on parts of the surface, can be distributed to the background nodes using shape functions. The implementation is verified
by convergences studies, of the geometry and of numerical solutions, which exhibit optimal rates. To verify the reliability of
the method, it is applied to various needle insertion simulations (e.g. for biopsy or brachytherapy) into brain and liver models.
The numerical results show that, while retaining the accuracy of the standard FEM, the proposed method can (1) make the
discretisation independent from geometric description, (2) avoid the complexity of mesh generation for complex geometries, and (3)
provide computational speed suitable for real-time simulations. Thereby, the proposed method is very suitable for patient-specific
simulations as it improves the simulation accuracy by automatically, and properly, taking the simulated geometry into account,
while keeping the low computational cost.
c⃝2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Cut finite element method; Unfitted FEM; Corotational CutFEM; Needle insertion; Real-time simulation
∗
Corresponding author at: Laboratoire de Math´ematiques de Besanc¸on (LMB) UMR CNRS 6623, Universit´e de Franche-Comt´e, Besanc¸on,
France.
∗∗
Corresponding author at: Institute of Computational Engineering, University of Luxembourg, Faculty of Sciences Communication and
Technology, Luxembourg.
E-mail addresses: huu-phuoc.bui@alumni.unistra.fr (H.P. Bui), stephane.bordas@alum.northwestern.edu (S.P.A. Bordas).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2018.10.023
0045-7825/ c⃝2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
184
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
1. Introduction
Nowadays real-time simulation plays an important role in different fields: graphic animation [1], fracture of stiff
materials [2], and surgical training and simulation [3–6], to name a few. In the medical context, surgical simulations
are not only useful for training, but also helpful for pre-operative planning, and intra-operative guidance. Surgical
simulations have to take into account interactions between a surgeon or an interventional radiologist with a deformable
organ via surgical instruments (e.g. a needle), and also interactions between the organ with its neighbouring structures.
To be useful in real-life situations, it is required that the computations are performed in real-time. To achieve real-time
performance, some advanced solvers, e.g. GPU-based computation [7], or asynchronous solver [6], can be used. The
computational time can also be reduced by using coarse meshes. However, using coarse meshes, some geometric
details are often lost. Simulations using coarse meshes are thus only suitable for targeted surgical training which
relies more on visual reality than on actual one. Such simulations fall short for surgical planning or guidance where
computations must provide accurate results. A model order reduction technique can also be used to solve system
equations with significantly less time but it results in lower accuracy [8]. To reduce the computational effort, Quesada
et al. [9] propose a computational parametric meta-model which is computed offline, and is only evaluated online.
Medical simulations have to deal with complex anatomical structures, e.g. prostate, blood vessel, liver, brain, brain
ventricle, etc. When the patient-specific geometry is considered, the mesh of the organ needs to be reconstructed since
the organ geometry is different from one patient to another. Misra and coworkers [10] have shown that the geometry
of the organ and boundary conditions surrounding the organ are the most important factors influencing the organ
deformation, and thus have a direct impact on the accuracy of simulation and planning. And when supercomputers
or parallel computation is not considered, in order to response to real-time simulation requirements, computations
involving interactions with surgical tools and/or cutting operations are performed on coarse meshes while applying
pre-computed deformation from fine meshes, see e.g., [4]. However, these coarse and fine meshes may not conform
to each other, resulting in different geometric descriptions and different boundary conditions, and thus the question of
simulation accuracy demands further investigation.
The use of geometric description in a computational method, so that the users only need to provide a background
mesh which is not necessarily conforming to the boundary geometry of the simulated object, can dramatically reduce
computational cost of preprocessing. This is the idea behind the fictitious domain method [11,12], or the cut finite
element method (CutFEM) [13]. The extended finite element method (XFEM) [14,15], and the generalised finite
element method (GFEM) [16] have been developed to deal with crack surfaces, or material interfaces evolving during
simulation. These approaches allow for computation of coupled physical processes on distinct subregions of the total
volume, and do not require an absolute conformity between the meshes from mesh construction as in [17,18]. In the
context of real-time patient-specific surgical simulations, using a unified geometric description in a finite element code
can help in (1) reducing preprocessing cost of mesh generation, and (2) implicitly improving accuracy of simulation
and planning (compared to the situation in which coarse meshes are employed in an inappropriate manner to achieve
real-time requirements).
The main contribution of our paper is to propose the corotational CutFEM approach which is suitable for real-
time patient specific simulations. The corotational model [19] is widely used for the treatment of large rotations
of soft tissues, see e.g., [7,20–24]. By using the proposed methodology, geometries of simulated objects can be
captured automatically. We also show that, for a given accuracy, using the proposed method is computationally
more advantageous than employing the standard FEM. On the implementation aspect of the method, we propose
the so-called multilevel embedding approach to correctly integrate implicit boundaries of the simulated organ, and to
accurately capture implicit interfaces of e.g., a tumour. The implementation is verified by convergence studies, which
exhibit optimal rates. We use Lagrange multipliers to impose Dirichlet boundary conditions on implicit boundaries,
whereas traction or Neumann boundary conditions, which is/are applied on parts of the surface, can be distributed to
the background nodes using shape functions. We demonstrate the performance of the corotational CutFEM through
various applications: from needle insertion simulations (e.g. for biopsy or brachytherapy) to simulation of electrode
lead implantation in Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) procedure. The algorithm is implemented in the open-source
SOFA framework [25].1
The remaining of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we describe the formulation of the needle
insertion problem into soft tissues, together with its discrete form. We then present the geometry discretisation of cut
1 https://www.sofa-framework.org.
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
185
Fig. 1. Two dimensional representation of the problems studied in the paper.
elements, and the algorithm for multilevel embedding approach to correctly integrate implicit boundaries/interfaces. It
is then followed by the discussion on implementation aspects. Next, a corotational formulation for CutFEM is briefly
introduced. It is followed by the description of how boundary conditions are applied on implicit surfaces. This section
is concluded with the discussion on solving the system equations with constraints. Numerical results are presented in
Section 3, which demonstrate the capabilities of the approach through various needle insertion problems into liver and
brain models. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4.
2. Methods
2.1. Problem setting
In the context of needle insertion into soft tissue, we model both, the needle and the tissue, as dynamic deformable
objects. Creating a good quality conforming mesh, when the tissue is modelled as heterogeneous material with
complex internal structures, or when the tissue has a complex geometry, is a very complicated and challenging task. To
overcome this burden, CutFEM has been proposed as it does not require conforming meshes. Fig. 1(a) schematically
shows a problem in which an interface is immersed into a tissue geometry for simulating e.g. a tumour geometry.
Fig. 1(b) shows a problem in which the tissue is simulated with an implicit boundary (i.e. the computational mesh is
not fitted to the tissue geometry).
Let Ωrepresent the tissue domain, and ∂Ωdenote its boundary. The tissue undergoes an imposed displacement
¯u on the boundary part Γu, and a traction force ¯t on the boundary part Γt. The governing equation of the problem
reads
div σ + ˆb + λ = ρ ¨u
in Ω,
(1a)
σ · n = ¯t
on Γt,
(1b)
u = ¯u
on Γu,
(1c)
where u is the displacement field of the object, σ is the Cauchy stress tensor, ˆb is the generalised body force vector,
ρ is the mass density, ¨u is the second partial derivative of u with respect to time, n denotes the outward unit normal
vector on Γt, and λ denotes the interaction force between the needle and the tissue. Within the dynamic behaviour
consideration, the generalised body force ˆb is expressed as
ˆb = ¯b −c ˙u,
(2)
where ¯b is the body force per unit volume, −c ˙u expresses the resistance opposite to the motion velocity ˙u, and c is
the viscosity parameter which can be considered to be numerically given value [26], see Section 2.2.
The strain, which is a deformation measure, is expressed through the displacement as
ϵ = 1
2
(
∇u + (∇u)T )
.
(3)
186
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
In this paper, we employ a linear elastic material based on corotational formulation, see also Section 2.4, so that
the stress–strain relationship is expressed as
σ = λdiv(u)I + 2µϵ,
(4)
where λ and µ are the Lam´e’s coefficients, and I denotes the identity matrix. The Lam´e’s coefficients are computed
from the Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s ratio ν as
λ =
Eν
(1 + ν)(1 −2ν),
µ =
E
2(1 + ν).
(5)
The interaction force λ is defined from the interaction law between the needle and the tissue. Three types of
constraints between the needle and the tissue are defined during needle insertion simulations: constraint for puncturing
at tissue surface, constraint at needle tip, and constraints along the needle shaft, see [27,28] for details. For the sake
of completeness, these constraints are recalled here. When the needle has not been penetrated into the tissue yet, the
contact between them verifies the Kuhn–Tucker condition in the direction n (normal to tissue surface)
δn ≥0;
λts
n ≥0;
δn · λts
n = 0,
(6)
where λts
n stands for the normal component of the constraint on the tissue surface, δn denote the distance between the
needle tip and the tissue surface in the direction n. This condition expresses the fact that the contact force only exists
when the needle tip is in contact with the tissue surface (δn = 0). In the tangential direction, a frictional contact is
expressed through the Coulomb’s friction law
λts
t < µ f λts
n
(stick);
λts
t = µ f λts
n
(slip),
(7)
with µ f denoting the coefficient of friction. When the normal component of the constraint is greater than the tissue
puncture strength λp0, which is read
λts
n > λp0,
(8)
the needle tip can penetrate into the tissue.
Once inside the tissue, at the needle tip, a constraint is defined between the latter and the tissue. This constraint
expresses the phenomenon that the tip is stuck, or can cut and advance inside the tissue. The condition for this
constraint reads
λnt
n < µλnt
t + λc0 (stick);
λnt
n ≥µλnt
t + λc0 (cut and slip),
(9)
where n now denotes the normal direction which is the direction of the needle shaft at the tip, the superscript nt
indicates the constraint at the needle tip, λc0 is the cutting strength of the tissue.
Since the needle shaft should follow the trajectory created inside the tissue by the needle tip when the latter
advances, constraints along the trajectory are defined between the tissue and the needle shaft which fulfil the
Coulomb’s friction law
λns
n < µλns
t
(stick);
λns
n = µλns
t
(slide),
(10)
where the superscript ns indicates the constraints along the needle shaft.
These three types of constraint are schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. It is noted that the total interaction force
between the needle and the tissue, at each time step, is nothing different from the normal force fn computed at a
cross-section of the needle model which has not been penetrated into the tissue yet, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
2.2. Weak form and FEM discretisation
For the numerical studies in the following, we employ homogeneous boundary condition on the Dirichlet boundary
Γu i.e. ¯u = 0. We denote the Sobolev space in three dimensions as (H 1(Ω))3, and then define the space of admissible
displacements V as
V = {v ∈(H 1(Ω))3 : v = 0 on Γu}.
(11)
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
187
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of constraint at the tissue surface λts (shown by red colour), constraints defined along needle shaft λns (illustrated
by green colour), and constraint at the needle tip λnt (depicted by blue colour). These constraints are defined on a corresponding local frame nt, and
they are located at the corresponding constraint points separated by a distance d. The interaction force between the needle and the tissue is simply
represented by the normal force fn of the needle model, computed at the non-penetrated (according to the tissue) cross-section of the needle shaft.
(For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
To begin with, for the sake of simplicity, we omit the interaction force λ in Eq. (1a), and only consider the tissue/needle
without any interaction with the other. The constraints for the interaction force will be dealt later. By multiplying
Eq. (1a) by a test function v ∈V, and integrating by parts on the domain Ω, we obtain
∫
Ω
divσ · v dΩ+
∫
Ω
b · v dΩ=
∫
Ω
ρ ¨u · v dΩ.
(12)
After performing the integration by parts to the integrand of the first term of the left-hand side in Eq. (12), and noting
that v vanishes on the boundary part ΓD, we end up with this variational formulation
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
Find a displacement u ∈V such that, ∀v ∈V,
∫
Ω
ρ ¨u · v dΩ+
∫
Ω
σ(u) : ε(v) dΩ+
∫
Ω
c ˙u · v dΩ



q(u,v)
=
∫
Ω
¯b · v dΩ+
∫
Γt
¯t · v dΓ



l(v)
(13)
To solve the problem described by Eq. (13) numerically, we need to transform the continuous variational problem
(13) to a discrete variational one. This is performed by introducing a finite-dimensional space, denoted by Vh ⊂V.
It is noted that in the CutFEM framework, for tissue deformation simulations, the space Vh is defined on the mesh
obtained from elements located inside the tissue surface and from elements cut by the tissue surface, see Section 2.3.
The problem now reads
{Find a displacement uh ∈Vh such that, ∀vh ∈Vh,
q(uh, vh) = l(vh).
(14)
The space Vh is constructed from a mesh Ωh obtained by spatially discretising the domain Ωinto ne finite elements
Ωe, e = 1, 2, . . . , ne, using nn nodes. For each element Ωe, we define an interpolation function (called shape function),
denoted by Ne = [N e
j ], j = 1, 2, . . . , me with me the number of nodes of the element e. Mathematically, these are
linear (P1) elements in three-dimensions. By integrating every term of Eq. (14), and then assembling for the whole
domain Ωh, we obtain the following discrete problem, in which the subscript h is dropped for the sake of simplicity
(see, e.g., [29,30])
M ¨u + C ˙u + Ku = f ext,
(15)
where M is the mass matrix, K is the stiffness matrix, C is the damping matrix, and f ext is the external force vector of
the whole system. These quantities are assembled from the corresponding element quantities: Me =
∫
Ωe NeT ρNe dΩ,
Ce =
∫
Ωe NeT cNe dΩ, K e =
∫
Ωe BeT EBe dΩ, in which Be is the strain–displacement matrix computed from
the derivative of the shape function Ne, and E is the fourth order tensor describing the stress–strain relationship
σ = E : ε. Moreover, f eext is computed from the body force ¯b and the traction ¯t acting on the element e. In this
paper, a lumped mass matrix is employed, where a diagonal mass matrix (from the mass density ρ) is integrated over
the volume of each element. The stiffness matrix K is computed using the corotational FEM for both, the needle
and the tissue, see Section 2.4. In practice, it is difficult to determine the damping matrix C as knowledge of viscous
188
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
parameter c is lacking. In our simulation, we employ Rayleigh damping which is a linear combination of stiffness and
mass matrices, see [31]
C = αM + β K.
(16)
We set α = 0.01, and β = 0.1 in our simulations.
The relation (15) can be rewritten as
Ma = f (x, v),
(17)
where x, v =
˙u, and a =
¨u, represent the position, velocity, and acceleration, respectively, and f (x, v) =
f ext −Ku −Cv represents the net force (the difference of the external and internal forces) applied to the object.
It is noted that we will use corotational formulation, see [32], to better capture the tissue/needle deformation under
large rotational deformation, see also [33], which often occurs in surgical simulations. Therefore, the system term Ku
is computed from the contribution of each element as will be described in Section 2.4.
For temporal discretisation of Eq. (17), i.e. to numerically solve the problem in time, an implicit backward Euler
scheme [34] is used to discretise the velocity and position as follows
˙ut+τ = ˙ut + τ ¨ut+τ;
ut+τ = ut + τ ˙ut+τ,
(18)
where τ denotes the time step. Inserting Eq. (18) into Eq. (17) yields the final discrete system
(M + τC + τ 2K)



A
dv = τ f (xt, vt) −τ 2Kvt



b
(19)
or simply Adv = b, where dv = vt+τ −vt. Note that here we use b to denote the right-hand side of Eq. (19), and it
does not mean the generalised body force described in Eq. (1a).
When taking into account the interaction between the needle and the tissue, Eq. (19) is rewritten as
Adv = b + HT λ,
(20)
in which HT provides the direction of the constraints. The interaction constraint λ, between the needle and the tissue,
is computed using Lagrange multipliers, see Section 2.6. To understand the matrix H, we suppose that the needle is
going to have contact with the tissue surface at the point P, as illustrated in Fig. 3. When they have been in contact,
the relative displacement between the needle tip Q and the contact point P in the direction of the contact n vanishes
δn = (uP −uQ) · n = 0.
(21)
Furthermore, the displacement at the contact point P on the tissue surface can be interpolated from the nodal
displacements of the corresponding triangle. Also, the displacement of the needle tip can be interpolated from the
corresponding needle element (1D element embedded in 3D space, described later)
uP =
∑
i
N 1
i (P)ui;
uQ =
∑
i
N 2
i (Q)ui,
(22)
where N 1
i , and N 2
i are the shape functions defined for the elements of the tissue surface and the needle, respectively.
By introducing Eq. (22) into Eq. (21), we can write
H1u1 −H2u2 = 0,
(23)
in which u1, and u2 are the nodes involving due to contact of the tissue surface and of the needle, respectively. By a
similar approach, we can write the interaction force due to contact applied to the involving nodes on the tissue and the
needle as
H1T λ = −H2T λ,
(24)
with λ the interaction force in the contact space. It is noted that, when using CutFEM for simulation of soft tissue, the
tissue surface is not conforming to the computational mesh, the force H1T λ is again interpolated into the involving
nodes of the computational mesh, see also Section 2.5.
After solving (20) for dv, the position and velocity for needle and tissue are updated as
vt+τ = dv + vt;
xt+τ = xt + τvt+τ.
(25)
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
189
Fig. 3. Schematic representation of contact between the needle (shown by red colour) and the tissue surface (shown by black colour). (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
The tissue domain is discretised by a tetrahedron mesh. For the tetrahedra that intersect with the immersed
interface/implicit boundary, an embedded element set is employed to facilitate the integration, see Section 2.3.
Since the length of the needle is much greater than the dimensions of its cross section, it can be safely assumed
that the cross section, which is normal to the mid-line (i.e. the neutral line) of the needle, remain planar and normal to
the mid-line during deformation. This makes it possible to use the Euler–Bernoulli beam theory [35] to describe the
behaviour of the needle. The needle is then discretised by one dimensional elements, and suitable shape functions (C1
continuous, e.g. Hermite) are employed for the interpolation of the displacement field so that the bending behaviour of
the needle is well taken into account. By this, each node of the elements used for the needle has 6 degrees of freedom
(3 translations and 3 rotations).
2.3. Geometry discretisation for immersed/implicit boundaries
The discretisation technique presented here is applicable for both, fictitious domain problems [11,36] and
nonconforming interface problems, see, e.g. [37].
2.3.1. Geometry discretisation
In fictitious domain or nonconforming interface approaches, the boundary of a given domain is embedded into a
computational mesh. The latter is used to approximate the solution of the governing PDEs. In general, the boundary
surface of the given domain is represented by a very fine mesh, and the boundary surface mesh and the computational
mesh are not assumed to be conforming. In fictitious domain method, the governing equations are integrated only
on the inside volume (i.e. Ω2, see Fig. 4(a)) bounded by the surface boundary, whereas in interface problems, during
integration, different mechanical properties are assigned to the outside volume Ω1 and inside volume Ω2, which are
separated by the surface, see Fig. 4(a). The domain is discretised by a mesh which is nonconforming with respect to
the surface Γ, as schematically shown in Fig. 4(b).
In order to accurately integrate on a given domain, the elements are firstly classified into three categories: cut
elements, inside elements (i.e. inside of Γ) and outside elements (i.e. outside of Γ), see Fig. 4(c). To facilitate
integration, each cut element is then embedded with a sub-element set consisting of elements which are conforming
with the surface Γ. It is important to note that the sub-element set is only used for integration purpose, and since the
degrees of freedom of the cut elements are still defined only on their nodes, the sub-element embedding approach
does not affect the approximation properties of the discretisation at all.
To identify the cut elements, we use the level-set method [38]. Fig. 5 schematically shows an element which is
potentially cut by the interface. To know if the element is cut by the interface, we define the level-set function as a
signed distance function from the nodes of the element to the interface, and check the sign of that function. An edge
Pi Pj of the element is cut by the interface if and only if
δ(Pi) · δ(Pj) < 0,
(26)
190
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 4. Two dimensional representation of the problem domains (a), the domains are nonconformingly discretised with respect to the surface Γ
(b), the cut elements are highlighted by yellow colour whereas all inside elements of the volume Ω2 are highlighted by red colour, the remaining
elements are marked as outside (i.e. outside of Γ) elements (c). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 5. Schematic representation of intersection computation between a triangle and a discretised surface. An embedded subtriangulation is
performed on the element for integration purpose.
where Pi and Pj denote the position of the two ends of the edge, and δ is the signed distance defined from the points
to the interface, see Fig. 5. The intersection between the interface and an edge is approximated by the zero level-set.
When Eq. (26) is fulfilled, the barycentric coordinate of the intersection reads
ξ =
|δ(Pi)|
|δ(Pi)| + |δPj|,
(27)
and the position of the intersection is computed as
P = (1 −ξ)Pi + ξ Pj.
(28)
In general applications, the immersed interface has a complex geometry, and it is not necessarily a convex surface,
see Fig. 9(a) for a liver surface as an example. Therefore, using the level set function to identify the inside and
outside elements may not be efficient, especially when the elements are far from the interface. In Section 2.3.4, an
efficient algorithm is presented to identify inside and outside elements when the cut elements are already marked
using the level-set method. Moreover, in Section 2.3.4, the details of embedding each cut element by a conforming
subtriangulation for integration purpose is presented.
2.3.2. Refinement for invalid cut elements
In Section 2.3.1, we assume that elements of the background mesh are cut by the surface interface with valid cases:
i.e. the intersection between a tetrahedron element and the surface is either a triangle or a quadrilateral, see Fig. 9(b).
The number of intersection between the surface and the element edges is either 3 or 4. However, invalid cutting cases
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
191
Fig. 6. Schematic representation of invalid cut elements in two dimensions: (a), (b), (c); refinements lead to valid cut elements: (d), (e), (f). Valid cut
elements are embedded with a subtetrahedron set (shown in green colour) for integration purpose: (g), (h), (i). (For interpretation of the references
to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
arise when, for example, an edge of an element is cut by the surface with more than one intersection, or there are
only two, or more than 4 edges of a tetrahedron, which are cut by the surface. These invalid cases can arrive when a
coarse background mesh is used together with a curved interface surface. Fig. 6a, 6b, and 6c schematically show, in
two dimensions, some invalid cut cases between a triangle and an interface curve.
To overcome this issue, one solution, as in [39], is to recursively embed the invalid cut element with a set of
sub-elements until all (sub) cut elements are valid, see Figs. 6d, 6e, and 6f. In what follows, this procedure is called
refinement. However, it is important to note that the invalid cut element is not actually refined since we do not introduce
any new degree of freedom into the background mesh. The number of level of refinement needed to get all valid cut
elements depends not only on the coarseness of the background mesh and curvature of the interface surface, but also
on the relative location between the cut element and the surface. In Figs. 6d, 6e, only one refinement level is needed
in order to get valid cut elements, whereas in Fig. 6f, two refinement levels are necessary. Once we get all valid
cut elements, they are embedded by a conforming subtriangulation as usual for integration reason, described above.
Figs. 6g, 6h, and 6i show the conforming embedded elements for valid cut (sub) elements.
192
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 7. A sphere is immersed into a background mesh (a), an invalid cut element is embedded with sub-tetrahedra after refinement (b), and
finally all, invalid and valid, cut elements, intersected with the spherical surface, are embedded with sub-tetrahedra, with or without refinement,
respectively, for integration reason (c).
As an example to demonstrate the implemented algorithm which works on tetrahedra, Fig. 7(a) shows a spherical
surface which is immersed into a background mesh, and valid and invalid cut elements with the spherical surface are
embedded with sub-tetrahedra shown in Fig. 7(c). Fig. 7(b) shows four levels of refinement needed to capture the
intersections between an invalid cut tetrahedron and the spherical surface.
2.3.3. Stabilisation by moving background nodes
There may be situations in which an element is cut by the surface with a very small intersection, as schematically
shown in Fig. 8a. These situations can strongly affect the stability of the system matrix. To remedy this stability issue,
we propose to move the concerned node by a random distance, which is proportional to the element size, defined by
the vector
d = −1
2β · le · n,
(29)
with 0 < β < 1 a random variable, le the element size, and n the outward unit normal of the surface. In practice, β is
set between 0.1 and 0.9 which can efficiently overcome the issue. This approach is schematically shown in Fig. 8b.
We define a criterion to detect when the intersection between an element and a surface is small, and thus the moving
node approach is applied. This criterion reads
Vi
Ve
< α,
(30)
where Vi is the volume of the smaller part of the element cut by the surface, and Ve is the total volume of the element.
In this study, we set α to 0.05, i.e., when the volume of the smaller part of the element is less than 5% of the total
volume of the element, we move the node.
It is important to note that this moving node approach is also applicable when refinement method described in
Section 2.3.2 fails to determine valid cut elements. In fact, if after five levels of refinement, invalid cut elements are
still present, we simply move, by a distance vector expressed in Eq. (29), the element node which is closest to the
intersection between the element and the surface.
2.3.4. Implementation aspects
To discuss the implementation aspects, as a starting point, we assume that an arbitrary surface is immersed into a
computational background mesh. An example of a liver surface being immersed in a computational tetrahedron mesh
is shown in Fig. 9(a).
Since the interface surface is arbitrary, and may be concave, due to the change of orientation of the outward normal
of the surface, it may not be efficient to use only level-set function to distinguish between three types of elements
described above. Moreover, to mark those elements which are far from the surface, using the distance function as
level-set function, in combination with outward normal of the surface, raises the ineffectiveness of the algorithm. To
remedy this issue, we mark different types of elements using the following approach, see also Fig. 10(a).
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
193
Fig. 8. When an element is cut by the surface with a small intersection (a), the concerned node is moved by a distance proportional to the element
size (b).
Fig. 9. A liver surface is immersed in a computational tetrahedron mesh (a), and intersection cases between a surface and a tetrahedron (b).
Step 1 Using level-set function (as described in Section 2.3.1), mark the cut elements by checking the potential
intersections between each triangle of the surface mesh with immediate neighbouring elements (tetrahedra)
of the triangle. Label these elements by 1,
Step 2 Mark the outside elements by propagating the marking procedure, starting from the elements located at the
boundary ∂Ωof the domain until a cut element is reached. Label these elements by 0,
Step 3 Mark the remaining elements as inside. Label these elements by 2.
To identify which tetrahedra are located around each triangle of the surface, to check for potential intersections in
Step 1, and to classify the tetrahedra located at the boundary domain ∂Ω(for marking procedure to propagate from)
in Step 2, we use the following approach. We first compute the bounding box of the domain. The bounding box is then
subdivided into subcubes, as shown in Fig. 10(a). All subcubes which are incident to each triangle of the surface, see
Fig. 10(b), are then computed. All tetrahedra which are incident to each subcube are also figured out, see Fig. 10(c).
From these two data structures, all cut elements can be marked because one can easily access the tetrahedra around
each triangle on the surface to check for intersections. On the other hand, to propagate marking procedure for outside
elements, all tetrahedra located at the boundary ∂Ωcan also be easily accessed from the boundary subcubes.
Fig. 11 shows three types of tetrahedra marked when a liver surface is immersed in a tetrahedron mesh.
Once all cut elements are identified, to facilitate the integration, a set of sub-tetrahedra with conforming nodes
(regarding the interface surface) is embedded in each cut tetrahedron. There are only two kinds of intersection between
a surface and a tetrahedron: a triangular intersection or a quadrilateral intersection, see Fig. 9(b). Therefore, it is
sufficient to employ a set of eight tetrahedra to embed for each cut tetrahedron, see Fig. 12(a). This set is called the
template set. Depending on each real case, where the tetrahedron is cut by a surface with a triangular intersection or
a quadrilateral one, the template set is rotated and then mapped into the cut tetrahedron geometry using the mapped
mesh method [27,40]. It is noted that the template nodes 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, see Fig. 12(a), are located at the middle of
their corresponding edges. Having determined the real intersections between the cut tetrahedron and the interface, as
194
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 10. Subdivision of the bounding box (a), subcubes incident to each triangle of the interface are computed (b), elements incident to a subcube
are marked (c).
Fig. 11. Three types of tetrahedra are marked when a liver surface is immersed in a computational tetrahedron mesh: cut element (a), inside
elements (b) and outside elements (c).
Fig. 12. A set of eight template tetrahedra (a). Depending on whether the intersection between a surface and a cut tetrahedron is a triangular section
or a quadrilateral one, the template is rotated and then mapped in the cut tetrahedron geometry (b).
described in Section 2.3.1, if any edge is intersected by the interface surface, the corresponding midpoint is moved to
match the real intersection.
Once a template set is embedded for each cut tetrahedron, the last step consists in computing the relative location
(inside or outside) of the sub-tetrahedra of the template with respect to the interface surface. For this purpose, we
again use the same level-set method which was used for computing the relative location (inside or outside) of the
tetrahedra. Fig. 13 shows the sub-tetrahedra which are marked inside and outside with respect to the liver surface.
As described in Section 2.3.2, when an invalid cut element arises, it is recursively embedded with a tetrahedron set
from a predefined template. It results in a tree data structure as schematically shown in Fig. 14. To efficiently handle
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
195
Fig. 13. Once a template tetrahedron set is embedded for each cut tetrahedron, using the level-set method, sub-tetrahedra are marked as inside (a)
or outside (b) with respect to the interface surface.
Fig. 14. Schematic representation of a tree data structure obtained when cut elements are embedded with a subtetrahedron set or when an invalid
cut element is recursively refined to get all valid cut elements before embedding with a subtetrahedron set. The elements of the background mesh
are indexed at level 0, while embedded elements are indexed at subsequent levels.
this type of data structure in implementation, we use a STL-like C++ tree class http://tree.phi-sci.com/. Using this
container, it allows to recursively add embedded elements as children of the cut element (regarded as parent) very
easily. The container also provides different kinds of iterators to access desired elements efficiently.
2.3.5. Numerical integration
For those elements that are fully contained in the domain Ω1 or Ω2, see Fig. 4(a), integration of element stiffness
and mass matrices are performed normally, as in classical FEM. Only for cut elements, the integration is split into
two parts which are related to the inside and outside sub-tetrahedra with respect to the interface. A two dimensional
schematic representation of the integration using natural coordinates on reference element is shown in Fig. 15.
196
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 15. Integration on cut elements. Note that the degrees of freedom are only defined on the element nodes P1, P2 and P3. χ and χp are the
coordinate mapping from the reference element to the physical sub-element, and to the physical cut (parent) element, respectively.
The stiffness matrix of the cut element reads
Ke = KΩ1
e
+ KΩ2
e ,
(31)
where KΩ1
e
and KΩ2
e
denote the stiffness contributions of the part belonging to Ω1 and Ω2, respectively, to the element
e. The stiffness matrix on each part is computed by summing the contributions from their sub-elements. For example,
the stiffness matrix KΩ2
e
reads
KΩ2
e
=
∑
s∈Ωk
2
∫
Ωk
2
BT
s E2Bs dΩk
2 =
∑
s∈Ωk
2
Np
∑
i=1
Bs(ξi)T E2Bs(ξi)ωi det(J(ξi)),
(32)
in which Bs is the strain–displacement matrix of the sub-element s, E2 is the material stiffness tensor of the domain
Ω2, ξi and ωi are the quadrature coordinates and the corresponding weight parameters, Np is the number of quadrature
points used, and J is the Jacobian matrix of the coordinate transformation. Since the stiffness matrix should be
expressed on the cut (parent) element where the degrees of freedom are defined, we must compute the strain–
displacement matrix Bp of the parent element at the quadrature point ˆξi corresponding to the physical coordinates
xi of the sub-element, see Fig. 15. So, Eq. (32) reads
KΩ2
e
=
∑
p∈Ωk
2
Np
∑
i=1
Bp(ˆξi)T E2Bp(ˆξi)ωi det(J(ˆξi)),
(33)
where Bp is the strain–displacement matrix defined on the parent element P1P2P3.
In this paper, we use linear tetrahedra. Therefore, the strain–displacement matrix is constant across the element
volume, and ωi = 1/6, det(J) = 6Vk with Vk the sub-element volume, see e.g. [41] for more details. Thereby, we get
KΩ2
e
=
∑
Ωk
2
BT
pE2BpVk.
(34)
The computation for KΩ1
e
can be done using the same concept. Also, integration over cut elements for the mass
matrices is performed by the same procedure.
2.4. Corotational formulation for CutFEM
In many surgical simulations, tissues undergo large displacements and rotations, see e.g. [42,43]. Using linear
elasticity for modelling of soft tissues results in artifacts for large rotational deformation [33]. To overcome this
issue, we compute the stiffness matrix using the corotational formulation as in [32], in which the rigid motion can be
extracted from the total finite element displacements.
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
197
Indeed, the system term Ku of Eq. (17) is computed by assembling the element internal force, denoted by f i
e . In
the following, the superscript i is dropped for simplicity. The element displacement vector ue is computed from the
rotated current configuration and the initial one as
ue = RT
e xe −x0e,
(35)
where Re stands for the element rotation matrix of the element local frame with respect to its initial orientation, being
updated at each time step. The corotated element internal force is then computed as
fe = Re Keue.
(36)
Using polar decomposition, the element rotation matrix Re is computed from the element deformation gradient Fe as
follows
Re · Ue = Fe,
(37)
where Ue is the right stretch tensor that is responsible for deformation. The element deformation gradient Fe is
computed as
Fe = Pn · N′,
(38)
where Pn is the element nodal coordinates, and N′ is the derivative of shape functions. For tetrahedron element, Pn
and N′ are 3 × 4 and 4 × 3 matrices, respectively
Pn =
⎛
⎝
x1
x2
x3
x4
y1
y2
y3
y4
z1
z2
z3
z4
⎞
⎠,
(39)
N′ =
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
∂N1
∂x
∂N1
∂y
∂N1
∂z
∂N2
∂x
∂N2
∂y
∂N2
∂z
∂N3
∂x
∂N3
∂y
∂N3
∂z
∂N4
∂x
∂N4
∂y
∂N4
∂z
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
.
(40)
The corotational formulation is summarised in Fig. 16. For elements cut by the surface, since degrees of freedom
are only defined on their nodes (not on nodes of subelements), see also Section 2.3.5, the element rotation matrix Re
is still computed by the procedure described above.
2.5. Boundary conditions on immersed surfaces
When using immersed surface, one needs to impose Neumann and Dirichlet boundary conditions on the immersed
surface, which does not conform with the computational mesh. For the Neumann boundary condition, a force applied
on the surface is barycentrically mapped onto the nodes of the element from the computational mesh which contains
the applied point of that force, see Fig. 17.
The concept of this approach is based on the master–slave scheme [44]. In this scheme, the displacement of a point
on the surface can be seen as a mapping of the displacement of the computational mesh, which is given by
uS = JuM,
(41)
where uS is the displacement of the surface (considered as slave), uM is the displacement of the computational mesh
(regarded as master), and J denotes the matrix containing barycentric coordinates (the relative coordinates) of the
considered point on the surface with respect to the computational mesh. For example, if the slave point is located at
the centroid of the triangle, the relationship described by Eq. (41) is explicitly expressed as
[uS
vS
]
=
(1/3
0
1/3
0
1/3
0
0
1/3
0
1/3
0
1/3
)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
u1
v1
u2
v2
u3
v3
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
,
(42)
198
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 16. By using corotational formulation, the rigid body motion is removed from the element deformation.
Fig. 17. A force Q applied on the surface at point xi (a), is barycentrically mapped into the nodes of the element from the computational mesh
containing xi (b).
where u and v are two components of the displacement in two dimensional space, the subscripts 1, 2, and 3 denote
three nodes of the triangle. By applying the principle of virtual work
uT
MQM = uT
S QS,
(43)
where QS and QM are the forces applied on the surface, and the equivalent forces applied at the computational mesh,
respectively. By substituting Eq. (41) into Eq. (43), one obtains
QM = JT QS.
(44)
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
199
Dirichlet boundary conditions at some nodes i on the surface, can be imposed as ui
S = ¯u, where ¯u is the prescribed
displacement. Taking into account Eq. (41), the Dirichlet boundary condition can be expressed as
JuM = ¯u.
(45)
Using Lagrange multipliers, one can easily impose the prescribed displacement on the computational mesh by solving
the system equation set
(A
JT
J
0
) {uM
λ
}
=
{b
¯u
}
,
(46)
where λ stands for Lagrange multipliers used for Dirichlet boundary conditions.
2.6. Solving system equations with constraints
To solve the system equations with constraints, there are several prominent approaches, each with their own
advantages and disadvantages. The penalty method, where the respective matrix entries are multiplied by some large
value, suffers from the uncertainty of the penalty parameter (weight). By using a very small value, the constraints may
not be accurately imposed, and using a high value may lead to an ill-conditioned system (and thus directly affecting
the computational time). The Nitsche’s method is problem-dependent since it requires a penalisation parameter
for stability. Compared to these two approaches, the Lagrange multiplier method offers some advantages. It offers
excellent generality and accuracy (no dependence on the problem), and it is almost insensitive to the user’s choice
(no parameter to choose). However, this method is no panacea either. Using Lagrange multiplier method, we have
to solve for additional unknowns. Nevertheless, in our implementation for Lagrange multiplier method, we do not
solve the system matrix with constraints by inverting the whole system (augmented with Lagrange multipliers) since
it renders the stiffness matrix indefinite. Instead, we solve the constraints in three steps, as described in the following:
(i) solve the unconstrained system, (ii) solve for constraints, and (iii) update the solution when Lagrange multipliers
are available. These steps are detailed in Algorithm 1. Note that, solving the system equations by using this approach is
also relevant for parallelisation, which is crucial for real-time simulations. We also remark that we do not employ any
stabilisation technique in the proposed Lagrange multiplier’s approach, such as that used in [11]. As stated in Section
2.2, for the tissue we employ C0-nonconforming three-dimensional linear elements, and for the needle we utilise
C1-conforming one-dimensional linear beam elements (see the end of Section 2.2). The numerical results presented
in Section 3, and those presented in [27,28], show that the proposed Lagrange multiplier approach, together with this
choice of spaces, delivers converging results, and that it does not suffer from any locking or instability issues. We
intend to conduct a rigorous mathematical analysis of the proposed method in our future work.
The interaction between the needle (denoted by subscript 1) and the tissue (denoted by subscript 2) can be expressed
by the following equation set
⎛
⎜⎝
A1
0
HT
1
0
A2
HT
2
H1
H2
0
⎞
⎟⎠
⎧
⎨
⎩
dv1
dv2
λi
⎫
⎬
⎭=
⎧
⎨
⎩
b1
b2
0
⎫
⎬
⎭,
(47)
where λi is the Lagrange multiplier representing the interaction between the needle and the tissue.
We can see that, Eq. (47) describing the interaction between the needle and the tissue, and Eq. (46) expressing the
constraints used for Dirichlet condition on implicit boundaries, have the same general form
(A
JT
J
0
) {x
λ
}
=
{b
c
}
.
(48)
Eq. (48) can be reformulated as
x = A−1b

x f ree
−A−1JT λ

xcor
,
(49a)
JA−1JT

W
λ = J A−1b

x f ree
−c,
(49b)
200
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Algorithm 1: Algorithm for solving the system equation with constraints (Eq. (48)). L denotes a lower unit triangular
matrix, and D is a diagonal matrix.
1: LDLT ←decompose(A)
▷(Cholesky decomposition)
2: x f ree ←solveCholesky(Ax f ree = b)
▷(Solve unconstrained problem)
3: λ ←solve(Wλ = Jx f ree −c)
▷(Solve for constraints, see Eq. (49b))
4: xcor ←solveCholesky(Axcor = JT λ)
▷(Compute corrective solution)
5: x ←x f ree −xcor
▷(Update solution, see Eq. (49a))
in which, x f ree can be seen as the solution of the unconstrained system Ax = b, xcor is the corrective solution due to
constraints, which can be seen as the solution of the system Axcor = JT λ. Here W denotes the compliance matrix. As
described in [28], to be able to solve Eq. (48) in real time, we use the advanced method described in Algorithm 1.
Therefore, three main steps for solving Eq. (48) can be summarised as
Step 1: Decompose the matrix A, and solve for x f ree, described by Lines 1 and 2 of Algorithm 1,
Step 2: Use x f ree, solve for Lagrange multipliers λ described in Line 3,
Step 3: Solve for the corrective solution xcor, and update the solution x, described in Lines 4 and 5.
It is noted that the compliance matrix W = JA−1JT is computed from the decomposition LDLT of the matrix A,
and this computation is parallelised on GPU, as proposed in [6,28].
3. Results
In this section, we present numerical results with the following goals:
1. To measure the convergence of the proposed implicit boundary method as compared to its conforming
counterpart (classical FEM) in terms of the ability to reproduce the geometry of the organ/domain. This is
the focus of Section 3.1, and partly of Section 3.2.
2. To measure the ability of the implicit boundary method in dealing with boundary conditions which are not
imposed upon the mesh, but upon an implicitly defined boundary. This is the focus of Sections 3.2–3.4.
3.1. Convergence study
Before proceeding to study the convergence of the numerical solution obtained using CutFEM, we first study how
accurately the non-polygonal geometry is approximated in CutFEM. In order to measure the ability of the method
to represent the exact geometry, we compute the volume of the geometry discretised by CutFEM. Since the input of
the geometry of the organ, e.g., liver or brain, is given in a discretised form, we compare the volume obtained using
CutFEM against the volume obtained from the discretised surface. We consider the discretised surface of a spherical
geometry with the diameter d = 1.4. As shown in Fig. 18, the volume error, between the volume obtained from the
discretised surface (Ve = 1.40005) and the volume V of the sphere discretised by CutFEM (based on the embedded
discretised surface), converges with an optimal rate, which is approximatively the same rate as the L2 norm of the
displacement error.
In order to verify the reliability of the solution obtained using CutFEM, now we study the convergence of the
solution under mesh refinement. We consider two cases, a tensile test and a bending test. As shown in Fig. 19, a
beam is studied with a spherical surface being embedded inside. As mentioned above, the spherical surface, with the
diameter d = 1.4, is given in the discretised form. At one end, the beam is subjected to a uniform horizontal pressure
(tensile) or a uniform vertical pressure (bending), while the other end is clamped. For the convergence study, the linear
elastic constitutive law is used. The mechanical properties, namely, the Young’s modulus and the Poisson’s ratio, are
denoted by E and ν, respectively. For the material outside the sphere we denote them by E1, ν1, and for the material
inside the sphere we denote them by E2 and ν2. The dimension of the beam is 6 × 2 × 2 mm. In order to compare the
convergences rate of the tests with the theoretical ones, we use the same mechanical properties for the material inside
and outside the sphere surface. We set thus E1 = E2 = 1000 MPa, and ν1 = ν2 = 0.1.
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
201
Fig. 18. Convergence of the volume of the sphere, discretised by CutFEM from the embedded discretised surface, as compared to the exact volume
obtained from the discretised surface (Ve = 1.40005), under background mesh refinement.
Fig. 19. A beam is clamped at the right end (marked by the red points), and is subjected to, at the left end (marked by the green triangles), a uniform
horizontal pressure (the tensile case) or a uniform vertical pressure (for bending case). A sphere surface is immersed inside the beam geometry.
The convergence is studied by computing the solution of the tensile and bending tests employing the tetrahedral
meshes consisting of 7 × 3 × 3, 13 × 5 × 5, 25 × 9 × 9, and 49 × 17 × 17 nodes. We propose to use the solution from
the classical FEM when employing a very fine mesh (97 × 33 × 33 nodes) as the reference solution. We then study
the convergence of the error between the CutFEM solution and the reference FEM solution. This error is measured by
using both, the L2 norm and the energy norm. The L2 norm of the displacement error reads
∥η∥L2 =
√∫
Ω(uh −ur)2 dΩ
∫
Ωu2r dΩ
,
(50)
where uh denotes the displacement solution of the CutFEM, and ur denotes the reference solution of the classical
FEM. The energy norm is defined as
∥η∥Energy =
√∫
Ω(σh −σr) · (ϵh −ϵr) dΩ
∫
Ωσr · ϵr dΩ
,
(51)
where σh and ϵh denote the stress and strain of the CutFEM, respectively, and σr and ϵr denote their reference values
obtained from the classical FEM on a very fine mesh.
For tensile and bending tests, Fig. 20 shows the convergence rates in the L2 norm and the energy norm versus the
number of DOFs. It is observed that for both tests, the rates of convergence of the L2 norm and the energy norm agree
well with the theoretical rates. Indeed, for 3D problems using linear elements, the L2 norm of the displacement error
is of order O(N −2/3), while the energy norm converges with an order of O(N −1/3), where N denotes the total number
of the degrees of freedom.
202
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 20. Convergence rates under mesh refinement for the tensile test (a), and for the bending test (b).
Fig. 21. Displacement (in mm) measured at the centre of the left end of the beam during simulations by the CutFEM and the classical FEM.
3.2. A comparison with FEM
The aim is to compare displacement simulation results obtained from the CutFEM using non-conforming meshes
with those obtained from the classical FEM using conforming meshes. We carry out the study on two different
geometries: the simple beam geometry with an immersed sphere as shown in Fig. 19, and the more complex liver
geometry as shown in Fig. 9(a).
For the beam geometry, the dimensions and the mechanical properties are same as those used in Section 3.1. The
displacement measured at the centre of the left end of the beam is employed to compare between the CutFEM (where
the sphere is modelled implicitly) and the classical FEM. The beam is subjected to a uniformly distributed pressure
q = −5 N/mm2 in the vertical direction at the left end, whereas it is clamped at the right end. Under various mesh
refinements, Fig. 21 shows the displacement of the point during simulations using the CutFEM and the classical FEM.
It is observed that, with the same number of degrees of freedom used, the results obtained from the CutFEM perfectly
agree with that of the classical FEM. Also, under mesh refinement, the displacement asymptotically convergences to
the solution of the fine mesh.
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
203
Fig. 22. Liver is implicitly clamped at the points shown in blue colour, and is implicitly subjected to a uniformly distributed vertical pressure acting
on the mesh shown in green colour. During the simulations, the displacement is measured at the point shown by the grey colour. (For interpretation
of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
For the liver, due to its complex geometry, in order to apply the same boundary conditions acting on different
conforming meshes (used for FEM), and on different non-conforming ones (used for the CutFEM), a homogeneous
Dirichlet boundary condition is implicitly applied to the model through the points located on an imaginary cutting
section, shown by the points in blue colour in Fig. 22, whereas a uniformly distributed pressure q = −1 N/mm2
is implicitly applied to the model in the vertical direction through the mesh shown by green colour in Fig. 22. The
displacement is measured at the point inside the liver shown by the grey colour in Fig. 22. For these simulations,
Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio are 1000, and 0.4 respectively.
Fig. 23 shows the displacement of the point shown in Fig. 22. It is observed that, at the same mean size of the
elements used, the results obtained from the CutFEM agrees well with those of the classical FEM. It is noted that
the number of degrees of freedom is not used as the same input during the comparison between the CutFEM and the
classical FEM since, with respect to the liver geometry, it does not characterise the same mesh resolution between
conforming mesh (used for FEM) and the non-conforming mesh (used for CutFEM). Instead, the mean element size
l is employed (see Fig. 23).
We now briefly discuss the computational cost of CutFEM vs FEM. We consider the liver model for this
comparison. For the simulation performed by FEM using a mesh with the mean mesh size l = 0.00635283,
compared to that performed by CutFEM using a mesh with l = 0.0059953, we observe a very good agreement
on the displacement, see Fig. 23. However, the use of CutFEM is more advantageous than the use of FEM since the
computational times needed to solve the system equation by using FEM and CutFEM are 983.41 ms and 429.85 ms,
respectively. Thus, for this mesh size, CutFEM is faster than FEM by a factor of approximately 2.3.
3.3. Needle insertion simulations
Having established the accuracy and reliability of CutFEM simulations as compared to the classical FEM, we now
employ the CutFEM approach for needle insertion problems.
3.3.1. Immersed interface
The needle, which is initially inclining at an angle of 3.5 degrees, is inserted into a phantom tissue with a simple
geometry, as shown in Fig. 24. We simulate a spherical inclusion (can be considered as a tumour) which is implicitly
immersed in the tissue phantom. The dimension of the tissue phantom is 6 × 2 × 2, while the radius of the inclusion
is 0.7. The length of the needle is 2.8, and its cross section radius is 0.05. Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the
needle is set to 20 000 and 0.2, respectively. These parameters for the phantom tissue are E1 = 1 000 and ν = 0.4. The
Poisson’s ratio of the inclusion is also set to 0.4, however, in order to investigate the effect of the inclusion stiffness
on the needle–tissue interaction force profile, the Young’s modulus of the inclusion E2 is varied with respect to that
of the phantom tissue by a factor of 1, 2, 4 and 8. The penetration strength at the tissue surface is set to 1, and the
frictional coefficient between the tissue and the needle shaft is set to 0.5.
204
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 23. Displacement measured (in cm) at the point shown in Fig. 22 during simulations by the CutFEM, and by FEM. Different mesh resolutions
are denoted by different values of l.
Fig. 24. Schematic illustration of a needle insertion simulation into a simple tissue geometry. The needle is initially inclining at an angle of 3.5
degrees.
Fig. 25 shows the needle–tissue interaction force with respect to the displacement of the needle tip, with different
ratios E2/E1. It is observed that when the needle tip reaches the tissue surface, the interaction force between the needle
and the tissue occurs. This interaction force continuously increases and when it reaches the tissue surface penetration
strength, the needle penetrates into the tissue. It also reveals that the closer to the inclusion the needle tip is, the more
different the interaction force profiles are obtained when the ratio E2/E1 is varied. This is indeed logical due to the
higher stiffness of the inclusion as compared to that of the tissue. When the displacement of the needle tip reaches 3,
the needle is continuously retracted until completely out of the tissue. During retraction process, the interaction force
changes its sign, and is negative, as observed in Fig. 25. The same conclusion about the effect of inclusion-tissue
stiffness ratio on the interaction force profile can be drawn during the retraction phase as during the insertion stage.
In Fig. 26, we present the results of mesh refinement study during needle–tissue interaction, while keeping the
ratio E2/E1 = 8 fixed. The curve profiles are qualitatively the same as of those curves presented in Fig. 25. Moreover,
it shows that when the mesh is refined, the proposed Lagrange multiplier method delivers convergent results (the
difference between the red and green curves is smaller than that between the blue and red curves).
3.3.2. Fictitious boundary
We now consider a comparison between a needle insertion simulation into a liver using implicit/fictitious
boundaries (CutFEM), and with those using explicit/conforming boundaries (classical FEM). The goal is to show the
performance of the CutFEM approach in dealing with Dirichlet boundary conditions defined implicitly on the surface,
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
205
Fig. 25. Force displacement curves, with varying Young’s modulus ratio E2/E1, when the needle is inserted into the soft tissue model. When the
needle tip displacement reaches about 3, the needle is retracted, and thus generating negative needle–tissue interaction force; at the stage when the
needle is completely retracted from the tissue, the interaction force vanishes. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 26. Force displacement curves, with varying mesh size (coarse mesh: 498 DOFs, finer mesh: 1575 DOFs, even finer mesh: 3183 DOFs) but
for fixed Young’s modulus ratio E2/E1 = 8, when the needle is inserted into the soft tissue model.
and in dealing with the interaction between the needle tip and the implicit surface (a kind of Neumann boundary
conditions), as compared to those dealt explicitly by FEM. For the liver, Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio are set
as 1 200 kPa and 0.4, respectively. For the needle, the same parameters as above are used. The background mesh used
for simulation with CutFEM, and the boundary conditions applied to the liver surface, are shown in Fig. 27. The point,
where the displacement is measured during the insertion and the retraction of the needle, is also shown in Fig. 27.
206
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 27. Background mesh used for the simulation of the liver behaviour during needle insertion and retraction. Some constraints, implicitly defined
on the liver surface using Lagrange multipliers, are shown by the blue points. During the simulation, the displacement is measured at a point located
near the needle shaft. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 28. Displacement measured at the point during insertion and retraction, using CutFEM and standard FEM. The vertical dash line indicates the
moment when the needle is starting to be retracted.
As can be seen in Fig. 28, the displacement results obtained by CutFEM agree well with those obtained by classical
FEM.
3.4. Electrode implantation simulation in Deep Brain Stimulation
The CutFEM is now employed to simulate an electrode lead implantation, using in Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS)
procedure. We also take into account the brain shift phenomenon, which occurs due to the leak of cerebro-spinal fluid
when a craniotomy is performed. The goal of the simulation is to insert an electrode inside the brain until it reaches
the target, e.g., subthalamic nucleus (STN) area for treatment of Parkinson’s disease. To do that, a cannula is inserted
together with the electrode lead through a hole drilled in the skull. When they reach the STN area, the cannula is
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
207
Fig. 29. Input background mesh used for simulation of brain behaviour (a); during simulation, the brain has interaction with the skull, and the
displacement is measured at the point shown in green colour (b). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
retracted while keeping the electrode lead inside. As in [43], frictional interactions between the brain tissue with the
cannula and electrode lead are simulated. Young’s modulus of 6 kPa and Poisson’s ratio of 0.45 are set to the brain
tissue. The cannula and electrode lead are set with Young’s modulus of 10 GPa, and with Poisson’s ratio of 0.3.
The input background mesh used for the CutFEM simulation of brain behaviour is shown in Fig. 29(a). We consider
simple boundary conditions for the brain tissue. Indeed, brain tissue around the optic nerves and the brainstem are
considered to be clamped. Moreover, bilateral interaction constraints are considered between the brain surface and the
skull. It is noted that these constraints are implicitly applied on the brain surface, as described in Section 2.5. During
simulation, the displacement is measured at the point in the STN area as shown in Fig. 29(b).
Fig. 30 shows the brain deformation at different stages of the simulation. The horizontal lines in Fig. 30 help to
show the differences of the brain deformation due to brain shift, and due to cannula insertion. The displacement of the
STN target due to brain shift, and due to cannula insertion and full retraction, is presented in Fig. 31. It reveals that the
brain shift is the origin of the STN displacement which is stabilised about 1.1 cm. When the cannula is inserted inside
the brain tissue, due to frictional interaction between them, the displacement of the STN target increases. The cannula
is undergoing retraction immediately after the cannula tip has reached the STN target. This induces the decreasing
of the STN displacement before the STN target is stabilised around the location, where the STN was found after the
brain shift stage.
These results show that the CutFEM, even with a nonconforming mesh, is able to simulate the behaviour of the
brain while it is in interactions with the skull, the cannula, and the electrode lead. This makes the discretisation
as independent as possible from the geometric description. We believe that with such a tool, the patient-specific
simulations (in terms of geometries, for instance) can be performed, particularly in the context of real-time
simulations.
4. Conclusions
A corotational formulation of the CutFEM has been proposed. Using Lagrange multipliers, we have shown the
methods to implicitly apply Dirichlet boundary conditions on the immersed surface, which is not conformed to
the background mesh used for the simulations. We verified the implementation by studying convergences through
a tensile test and a bending one. We also demonstrated the performance of the CutFEM, compared to the classical
208
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
Fig. 30. Brain at initial state (a), brain deformation due to brain shift (b), brain deformation due to cannula insertion (c). The blue horizontal
line helps to visualise the brain deformation due to brain shift occurring after a craniotomy, whereas the green line helps to visualise the brain
deformation due to the cannula insertion. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)
Fig. 31. Displacement of the STN target due to brain shift, and due to cannula insertion and retraction.
FEM, through needle insertion problems in medical simulations (e.g. for biopsy or brachytherapy). We have shown
that the interaction between the tissue surface being implicitly defined, and the needle tip, to account for the
penetration phenomenon of the latter to the former (a kind of Neumann boundary conditions) during simulations,
is working properly, and refers to the real-life situation. Also, by employing the CutFEM, it makes the discretisation
as independent as possible from the geometric description, and also minimises the complexity of mesh generation,
especially for complex geometries. Because of the constraint of computational time in real-time simulation context,
while still preserving the geometric details, the use of coarse meshes becomes possible by using CutFEM.
Two kinds of applications using the CutFEM have been studied in this paper: (i) immersed interfaces, and (ii)
fictitious boundaries. The immersed interfaces are useful for simulations of heterogeneity of tissues, e.g., when
tumours or internal structures of tissues are considered. Simulations using fictitious boundaries are suitable for
applications in which the tissue geometries are complex, and by using the CutFEM, it is possible to integrate only the
material inside the tissue surface while using a nonconforming mesh to its boundaries.
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
209
In the presented work, for the discretisation of simulated domains, we limited ourselves to linear elements. Another
limitation is the embedding of linear subelements for the cut elements to facilitate numerical integration. By doing
this, we still cannot precisely capture the surface geometries. For more accurate integration of implicit geometries,
one can use higher order elements, as proposed in [39,45]. We note that the isogeometric analysis, in the spirit of
integrating finite element analysis and CAD design tools by using higher-order spline/NURBS basis functions from
CAD geometry, could also be used for surgical simulations. We intend to study this approach in our future work. The
interested readers are referred to [46] for pioneering work on isogeometric analysis, and a very recent work [47] on
recovery-based error estimation and adaptivity over hierarchical T-meshes.
Acknowledgements
St´ephane Bordas, Satyendra Tomar and Huu Phuoc Bui thank partial funding for their time provided by the
European Research Council Starting Independent Research Grant (ERC Stg grant agreement No. 279578) RealTCut
“Towards real time multiscale simulation of cutting in non-linear materials with applications to surgical simulation
and computer guided surgery”. The authors are also grateful for the funding from the Luxembourg National Research
Fund (INTER/FWO/15/10318764).
The funding from the University of Strasbourg Institute for Advanced Study (BPC 14/Arc 10138) for the first
author is gratefully acknowledged.
Huu Phuoc Bui would particularly like to thank Dr. Davide Baroli, Dr. Lionel Untereiner, Dr. Paul Hauseux,
Prof. Thomas-Peter Fries, Dr. Franz Chouly, Prof. Alexei Lozinski, and Prof. St´ephane Cotin for many helpful
discussions.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2018.10.023.
References
[1] S.R. Musse, D. Thalmann, Hierarchical model for real time simulation of virtual human crowds, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 7 (2)
(2001) 152–164, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/2945.928167.
[2] M. Müller, L. McMillan, J. Dorsey, R. Jagnow, Real-Time Simulation of Deformation and Fracture of Stiff Materials, Springer Vienna,
Vienna, 2001, pp. 113–124, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-6240-8_11.
[3] S. Cotin, H. Delingette, N. Ayache, Real-time elastic deformations of soft tissues for surgery simulation, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics
5 (1) (1999) 62–73, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/2945.764872.
[4] S. Cotin, H. Delingette, N. Ayache, A hybrid elastic model for real-time cutting, deformations, and force feedback for surgery training and
simulation, Vis. Comput. 16 (8) (2000) 437–452, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/PL00007215.
[5] C. Monserrat, U. Meier, M. Alcaiz, F. Chinesta, M. Juan, A new approach for the real-time simulation of tissue deformations in surgery
simulation, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 64 (2) (2001) 77–85, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2607(00)00093-6.
[6] H. Courtecuisse, J. Allard, P. Kerfriden, S.P. Bordas, S. Cotin, C. Duriez, Real-time simulation of contact and cutting of heterogeneous
soft-tissues, Med. Image Anal. 18 (2) (2014) 394–410.
[7] H. Courtecuisse, H. Jung, J. Allard, C. Duriez, D.Y. Lee, S. Cotin, GPU-based real-time soft tissue deformation with cutting and haptic
feedback, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 103 (2) (2010) 159–168, Special issue on Biomech. Modell. Soft Tissue Motion. http://dx.doi.org/1010
16/j.pbiomolbio.201009016.
[8] S. Niroomandi, I. Alfaro, D. González, E. Cueto, F. Chinesta, Real-time simulation of surgery by reduced-order modeling and x-fem
techniques, Int. J. Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. 28 (5) (2012) 574–588, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cnm.1491.
[9] C. Quesada, D. González, I. Alfaro, E. Cueto, F. Chinesta, Computational vademecums for real-time simulation of surgical cutting in haptic
environments, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 108 (10) (2016) 1230–1247, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.5252.
[10] S. Misra, K. Macura, K. Ramesh, A. Okamura, The importance of organ geometry and boundary constraints for planning of medical
interventions, Med. Eng. Phys. 31 (2) (2009) 195–206, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.medengphy.2008.08.002.
[11] E. Burman, P. Hansbo, Fictitious domain finite element methods using cut elements: I. A stabilized Lagrange multiplier method, Comput.
Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 199 (41) (2010) 2680–2686, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2010.05.011.
[12] E. Burman, P. Hansbo, Fictitious domain finite element methods using cut elements: II. A stabilized Nitsche method, Appl. Numer. Math. 62
(4) (2012) 328–341.
[13] E. Burman, S. Claus, P. Hansbo, M.G. Larson, A. Massing, CutFEM: Discretizing geometry and partial differential equations, Internat. J.
Numer. Methods Engrg. 104 (7) (2015) 472–501, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.4823.
[14] T. Belytschko, T. Black, Elastic crack growth in finite elements with minimal remeshing, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 45 (5) (1999)
601–620, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0207(19990620)45:5<601::AID-NME598>3.0.CO;2-S.
[15] N. Moës, J. Dolbow, T. Belytschko, A finite element method for crack growth without remeshing, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 46 (1)
(1999) 131–150, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0207(19990910)46:1<131::AID-NME726>3.0.CO;2-J.
210
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
[16] T. Strouboulis, I. Babuka, K. Copps, The design and analysis of the generalized finite element method, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
181 (1) (2000) 43–69, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0045-7825(99)00072-9.
[17] G. Tabor, P.G. Young, T.B. West, A. Benattayallah, Mesh construction from medical imaging for multiphysics simulation: Heat transfer and
fluid flow in complex geometries, Eng. Appl. Comput. Fluid Mech. 1 (2) (2007) 126–135, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19942060.2007.110151
87.
[18] M. Moumnassi, S. Belouettar, E. Béchet, S.P. Bordas, D. Quoirin, M. Potier-Ferry, Finite element analysis on implicitly defined domains:
An accurate representation based on arbitrary parametric surfaces, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 200 (5) (2011) 774–796, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2010.10.002.
[19] G.F. Moita, M.A. Crisfield, A finite element formulation for 3-D continua using the co-rotational technique, Internat. J. Numer. Methods
Engrg. 39 (22) (1996) 3775–3792, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0207(19961130)39:22<3775::AID-NME23>3.0.CO;2-W.
[20] S. Suwelack, S. Röhl, R. Dillmann, A.-L. Wekerle, H. Kenngott, B. Müller-Stich, C. Alt, S. Speidel, Quadratic Corotated Finite Elements for
Real-Time Soft Tissue Registration, Springer New York, New York, NY, 2012, pp. 39–50, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-3172-5_6.
[21] N. Haouchine, J. Dequidt, I. Peterlik, E. Kerrien, M.O. Berger, S. Cotin, Image-guided simulation of heterogeneous tissue deformation for
augmented reality during hepatic surgery, in: 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, ISMAR, 2013, pp.
199–208, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2013.6671780.
[22] J. Dequidt, E. Coevoet, L. Thinès, C. Duriez, Vascular Neurosurgery Simulation with Bimanual Haptic Feedback, in: F. Jaillet, F. Zara, G.
Zachmann (Eds.), Workshop on Virtual Reality Interaction and Physical Simulation, The Eurographics Association, 2015, http://dx.doi.org/
10.2312/vriphys.20151337.
[23] K. Sase, A. Fukuhara, T. Tsujita, A. Konno, GPU-accelerated surgery simulation for opening a brain fissure, ROBOMECH J. 2 (1) (2015)
17, http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40648-015-0040-0.
[24] F. Morin, H. Courtecuisse, I. Reinertsen, F.L. Lann, O. Palombi, Y. Payan, M. Chabanas, Brain-shift compensation using intraoperative
ultrasound and constraint-based biomechanical simulation, Med. Image Anal. 40 (Supplement C) (2017) 133–153, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016
/j.media.06.003.
[25] F. Faure, C. Duriez, H. Delingette, J. Allard, B. Gilles, S. Marchesseau, H. Talbot, H. Courtecuisse, G. Bousquet, I. Peterlik, S. Cotin, SOFA:
A Multi-Model Framework for Interactive Physical Simulation, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 283–321, http://d
x.doi.org/10.1007/8415_2012_125.
[26] A.K. Chopra, Dynamics.of. Structures, Dynamics of Structures, in: Prentice-Hall International Series in Civil Engineering and Engineering
Mechanics, Pearson Education, 2007.
[27] H.P. Bui, S. Tomar, H. Courtecuisse, S. Cotin, S.P.A. Bordas, Real-time error control for surgical simulation, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 65
(3) (2018) 596–607, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2017.2695587.
[28] H.P. Bui, S. Tomar, H. Courtecuisse, M. Audette, S. Cotin, S.P. Bordas, Controlling the error on target motion through real-time mesh
adaptation: Applications to deep brain stimulation, Intl. J. Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. e2958–n/aE2958 cnm.2958, http://dx.doi.org/10.1
002/cnm.2958.
[29] O. Zienkiewicz, R. Taylor, The Finite Element Method: Solid mechanics, Referex collection.Mecánica y materiales, Butterworth-Heinemann,
2000.
[30] G.R. Liu, S.S. Quek, Chapter 3 — Fundamentals for finite element method, in: G.R. Liu, S.S. Quek (Eds.), The Finite Element Method,
second ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 2014, pp. 43–79, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098356-1.00003-5.
[31] O. Zienkiewicz, R. Taylor, J. Zhu, The Finite Element Method: Its Basis and Fundamentals, vol. 1, Elsevier, 2013.
[32] C. Felippa, B. Haugen, A unified formulation of small-strain corotational finite elements: I. theory, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
194 (21–24) (2005) 2285–2335.
[33] M. Müller, J. Dorsey, L. McMillan, R. Jagnow, B. Cutler, Stable real-time deformations, in: Proceedings of the 2002 ACM SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer animation, 2002, pp. 49–54.
[34] D. Baraff, A. Witkin, Large steps in cloth simulation, in: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH, 1998, pp. 43–54.
[35] S. Timoshenko, History of Strength of Materials: With a Brief Account of the History of Theory of Elasticity and Theory of Structures, in:
Dover Civil and Mechanical Engineering Series, Dover Publications, 1953.
[36] F. Sotiropoulos, X. Yang, Immersed boundary methods for simulating fluid–structure interaction, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 65 (2014) 1–21, http://d
x.doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2013.09.003.
[37] F. Qin, J. Chen, Z. Li, M. Cai, A Cartesian grid nonconforming immersed finite element method for planar elasticity interface problems,
Comput. Math. Appl. 73 (3) (2017) 404–418, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2016.11.033.
[38] J. Sethian, Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods: Evolving Interfaces in Computational Geometry, Fluid Mechanics, Computer
Vision, and Materials Science, in: Cambridge Monographs on Applied and Computational Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[39] T.-P. Fries, S. Omerovi´c, Higher-order accurate integration of implicit geometries, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 106 (5) (2016)
323–371, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.5121.
[40] N.M. Grosland, R. Bafna, V.A. Magnotta, Automated hexahedral meshing of anatomic structures using deformable registration, Comput.
Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 12 (1) (2009) 35–43, pMID: 18688764. http:/dx.doi.org/10.1080/10255840802136143.
[41] G. Dhatt, G. Touzot, E. Lefran¸ois, Finite Element Method, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2012, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118569764.
[42] R. Plantefève, I. Peterlik, N. Haouchine, S. Cotin, Patient-specific biomechanical modeling for guidance during minimally-invasive hepatic
surgery, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 44 (1) (2016) 139–153, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10439-015-1419-z.
[43] H.P. Bui, S. Tomar, H. Courtecuisse, M. Audette, S. Cotin, S.P. Bordas, Controlling the error on target motion through real-time mesh
adaptation: Applications to deep brain stimulation, Intl. J. Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. e2958–n/aE2958 cnm.2958, http://dx.doi.org/10.1
002/cnm.2958.
[44] T. Rabczuk, R. Gracie, J.-H. Song, T. Belytschko, Immersed particle method for fluid–structure interaction, Internat. J. Numer. Methods
Engrg. 81 (1) (2010) 48–71, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.2670.
H.P. Bui, S. Tomar and S.P.A. Bordas / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 345 (2019) 183–211
211
[45] M. Moumnassi, S. Bordas, R. Figueredo, P. Sansen, Analysis using higher-order xfem: implicit representation of geometrical features from
a given parametric representation, Mech. Ind. 15 (5) (2014) 443–448, http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/meca/2014033.
[46] T. Hughes, J. Cottrell, Y. Bazilevs, Isogeometric analysis: CAD finite elements NURBS exact geometry and mesh refinement, Comput.
Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 194 (39) (2005) 4135–4195, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2004.10.008.
[47] C. Anitescu, M.N. Hossain, T. Rabczuk, Recovery-based error estimation and adaptivity using high-order splines over hierarchical T-meshes,
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 328 (2018) 638–662, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2017.08.032.
