J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
DOI 10.1007/s10916-016-0459-8
EDUCATION & TRAINING
A Review of Simulators with Haptic Devices for Medical
Training
David Escobar-Castillejos1 · Julieta Noguez1 · Luis Neri2 · Alejandra Magana3 ·
Bedrich Benes4
Received: 3 November 2015 / Accepted: 1 February 2016 / Published online: 18 February 2016
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016
Abstract Medical procedures often involve the use of the
tactile sense to manipulate organs or tissues by using spe-
cial tools. Doctors require extensive preparation in order
to perform them successfully; for example, research shows
that a minimum of 750 operations are needed to acquire
sufficient experience to perform medical procedures cor-
rectly. Haptic devices have become an important training
alternative and they have been considered to improve med-
ical training because they let users interact with virtual
environments by adding the sense of touch to the simula-
tion. Previous articles in the field state that haptic devices
enhance the learning of surgeons compared to current train-
ing environments used in medical schools (corpses, animals,
or synthetic skin and organs). Consequently, virtual envi-
ronments use haptic devices to improve realism. The goal
of this paper is to provide a state of the art review of
recent medical simulators that use haptic devices. In par-
ticular we focus on stitching, palpation, dental procedures,
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Education &
Training
 David Escobar-Castillejos
a01170737@itesm.mx
1
Escuela de Ingenieria y Ciencias, Instituto Tecnologico y de
Estudios Superiores de Monterrey Campus Ciudad de Mexico,
Distrito Federal, Mexico
2
Escuela de Educacion, Humanidades y Ciencias Sociales,
Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey
Campus Ciudad de Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico
3
Associate Professor of Computer and Information Technology,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
4
Professor of Computer Graphics Technology, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
endoscopy, laparoscopy, and orthopaedics. These simulators
are reviewed and compared from the viewpoint of used tech-
nology, the number of degrees of freedom, degrees of force
feedback, perceived realism, immersion, and feedback pro-
vided to the user. In the conclusion, several observations per
area and suggestions for future work are provided.
Keywords E-learning · Medical training · Haptic devices ·
3D simulators · Training
Introduction
Teaching process is a key element during the training of pro-
fessionals. This has been characterized as a professor-based
approach, which is considered as the most effective mean
to acquire new knowledge [1]. Since the origin of comput-
ers, researchers have been looking for new ways to improve
and reduce the costs in the teaching process. Therefore, dif-
ferent types of simulations, control systems and learning
environments via the Internet have emerged in the field of
Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) and e-learning [2].
One of the main areas where TEL environments have
been developed is the medical field. Surgical procedures
have a high degree of difficulty and complexity. It is nec-
essary to provide students or practitioners a proper and
extensive learning process before they can perform surg-
eries correctly. The learning curve in the medical process is
a concept focused on two aspects: optimization of operating
time [3] and reduction of patients bleeding [4]. Vickers et al.
[5] stated that about 750 operations are needed to improve
surgical procedures. They also found that patients who have
been treated by doctors with surgical experience, that have
performed between 750 and 10,250 procedures, tend to have
fewer health problems than patients who were treated by
doctors with less experience.
104
Page 2 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Considering advances in technology and new laws in the
medical field, various solutions have been pursued to allow
medical students to acquire the necessary skills involved
in medical procedures. Some solutions involve the use of
animals in operating rooms, which must have similar condi-
tions as those related to humans. Devices that use synthetic
materials to resemble human skin have also been imple-
mented. Nevertheless, they fail to emulate the real char-
acteristics of human skin. Other solutions suggest the use
of virtual environments, which can simulate situations with
different levels of risk. Former virtual environments only
exploited the senses of sight and hearing; consequently, they
excluded other interaction possibilities.
Several companies and authors had created e-learning
environments for medical education. These advances have
been reviewed to assess the impact in medical education [6,
7]. However, Secin et al. [8] stated that current surgical envi-
ronments did not provide the realism needed to train future
doctors during operations, they did not provide users the
sense of force strength during the task, or they were not able
to adequately develop the necessary skills.
As a solution, haptic simulation has great potential to
improve medical training. A haptic device is a mechanical
input/output device that enables users interact with virtual
environments by adding the sense of touch, which enhances
the learning quality [9]. The incorporation of haptic tech-
nologies in medical software and simulations has grown [10,
11] and various companies developed medical stations using
haptic devices [12–17].
The use of haptic simulators provides new alternative
solutions that also allow the development of new teaching
methods. The advantage of haptic technologies in virtual
environments is the ease they have to recreate difficult sit-
uations originated during real practices. They provide new
means of exploration and representation. They enable the
creation of systems that are capable of implementing new
methods or procedures, and in some cases, these systems
can generate uncommon anatomies by modifying specific
models with patients information, as it has been reviewed
[9]. Therefore, they provide students the ability to practice
surgery as often as necessary.
This paper reviews recent advances in medical training
simulators with the focus on haptic technologies. In particu-
lar, virtual environments that use commercial haptic devices
were chosen because these have already been benchmarked
and they accomplish security and performance standards.
This review is focused on stitching, palpation, dental,
endoscopy, laparoscopy, orthopaedics, and miscellaneous
procedures. Existing works and simulators are reviewed and
compared from the point of view of used technology, the
number of degrees of freedom and degrees of force feed-
back, immersion, and learning feedback provided to the
user. At the end, several observations per area are provided
and suggestions for future work are proposed.
Haptics
Haptic devices
Haptic devices are electro-mechanical devices with handlers
(Fig. 1) that allow motion with several Degrees of Freedom
(DoF). When coupled with virtual simulators, they provide
the user the sense of touch in addition to the sight. In haptic
environments, touch sensation can be performed by humans,
machines or a combination of both, while objects and/or
environments may be real, virtual, or a combination of both.
Current physical haptic devices always present a residual
inner friction that can be perceived as noise, which can even
fatigue the user in some cases. Additionally, the device itself
has a certain degree of inertia, which present a problem if
the user moves the haptic device quickly. Haptic devices bal-
ance to compensate for external forces of the systems, such
as gravity. They also have mechanisms that provide suffi-
cient reaction to stimulation and effort sense to detect hard
surfaces [19]. Their resolution, i.e., the amount of feedback
per unit of distance, needs to be high in order to provide
a greater detail of textures in virtual environments, and the
movement area must be large enough in order to simulate
the actual workspace. Moreover, haptic devices have differ-
ent DoF depending on the amount of directions they can
move. The most common are haptic devices with 3-DoF that
can follow the XYZ axis.
Current haptic devices use two basic variations to control
interaction: impedance control and admittance control. In
impedance control, the user moves the device, and it sends
the data back to the computer; therefore, the application is
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 1 Commonly used haptic devices in virtual simulators. a) Phantom Omni ®, b) Phantom Desktop ®. c) Phantom Premium ®, and d)
Novint Falcon ®
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 3 of 22
104
responsible for controlling the feedback. Prime examples
of this type of device are Phantom ®, built by Geomagic
® (previously known as SensAble Technologies ®), and
Falcon ® from Novint Technologies Inc ® (Fig. 1).
In contrast, by using the admittance control devices users
exert a force on the device, which reacts by displacing it
in a proportional distance. This action is translated in the
device as displacement of the input and force feedback as
the output of the system. This type of control provides
the users with the freedom in the mechanical design of
the devices, and these devices are able to produce move-
ment with greater force and stiffness. However, due to their
complexity, they are usually very large and they must be
designed carefully to interact safely with humans. Conse-
quently, they are not commonly used in the training field.
An example of these devices is HapticMaster ®, manufac-
tured by Mog Corporation ® (previously known as FCS
Control Systems ®) [20].
Haptic rendering
The goal of haptic rendering is to enable the user to feel,
touch, and manipulate virtual objects through a haptic inter-
face. The type of interaction defines the procedure for haptic
rendering and how the forces are rendered. These methods
can be identified by the way they model the interaction of
the haptic device in the virtual environment. There are three
kinds of haptic rendering: a) point-based, b) ray-based, and
c) based on a 3D object made by a group of points, lines and
polygons [18] as shown in Fig. 2.
Rendering of deformable objects is often required in
medical procedures. Visual rendering has been studied
extensively in the area of computer graphics [21]. Basdo-
gan et al, have divided rendering techniques of deformable
objects into two types: geometry-based and physics-based
[18].
Geometry-based techniques deform the object based on
geometric manipulations. For instance, the user manipulates
the vertices or control points around the 3D object to mod-
ify the shape of the object. These techniques are usually
fast and relatively easy to implement; however, they focus
mainly on the visual representation, which does not neces-
sarily simulates the underlying mechanical deformation.
Physics-based algorithms add physics simulation to the
modification of geometry by modeling the physical laws
involved in the movement of the object and the dynamics
of the interaction within it. Physical approaches are neces-
sary to simulate a realistic behavior of deformable objects.
Nevertheless, physical rendering is computationally more
expensive than pure geometry-based modeling.
Haptics in medical training
We describe and analyze recent virtual simulators that use
haptic devices to practice medical procedures. These are
organized by types of medical practices they simulate.
Stitching techniques
Simulation of stitching procedures is one of the areas where
haptic technology has been implemented to create learn-
ing simulators. Skin and organs have flexible features, so
stitching simulators consider mainly rendering techniques
of deformable objects. Additionally, haptic simulators com-
bined with active learning environments can provide users
with features such as deformation of the suture thread, knot
tying, and interaction between tools, the needle and the
environment, as can be seen in [22]. Jia and Pan devel-
oped a stitching simulator which can simulate interaction
and deformation of the suture thread and objects [23]. They
applied the Follow the Leader (FTL) algorithm [24] to sim-
ulate the thread, where each link can rotate freely at their
connecting vertex. On the side of the deformable object,
a tensor mass-spring deformation model in a tetrahedral
mesh was implemented to simulate the skin. For collision
detection in the environment their simulator uses an Axis-
Aligned Bounding Box (AABB) tree, where the shape of
the bounding boxes are updated during the simulation. The
simulator uses a single Phantom Desktop ® haptic device;
nevertheless, the proper process of stitching simulators is
two handed. The novelty of the work presented by Jian
Force
Force
Torque
Force
Torque
Fig. 2 Haptic rendering techniques: based on points (left), line segments (middle), and a 3D object (right) [18]
104
Page 4 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Fig. 3 Suture simulator
developed by Payandeh and Shi
[23]. The skin model (a) is
constructed as a mass-spring
system (b) and the system uses
two haptic device to operate the
suture thread
and Pan is the description of four possible states for the
position of the needle according to its interaction with the
virtual skin:
1.
the needle is completely outside of the deformable
object,
2.
the end of the needle is in contact with the skin (end
touching),
3.
the tip of the needle is in contact with the skin, but it has
not pierced the skin yet (tip touching), and
4.
the needle is piercing the skin.
Their environment provides a functional approach to
suture tasks, and it uses shadows for the 3D location of the
haptic probe; however, the simulator lacks the skin texture,
the knot tying action of the suture, the needle is modeled as a
line segment, and, as mentioned before, it only implements
a single haptic device.
Similar research was used by Payandeh and Shi [25]
who proposed a serious gaming platform to teach suturing
and knotting for simple skin or soft tissue wound closure.
The haptic devices used in the experimental study were two
Phantom Omni ®. They also used a mass-spring model to
create the deformable skin and the suturing material and
they used Bounding-Volume Hierarchy (BVH) to detect col-
lisions and self-collisions in the suture thread (Fig. 3). They
used Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) files pro-
duced in Autodesk ® 3ds Max ® to create 3D models of
pre-wounded skin. Latter, the simulator imports these files
to build the virtual objects.
Payandeh and Shi presented a suture simulator based on
physics models, and it allows users to tie a knot. One feature
that has to be remarked in this work is that it implements
tissue tearing. This is made by finding intersection points
between each polygon and the tearing path. However, if
the user repeatedly inserts the needle at the same location,
the mesh can be subdivided, which can generate unwanted
small triangles.
Another interesting research is the one made by Choi
et al. [27]. They used the physical rendering engine
NVIDIA ® PhysX ® in collaboration with OpenGL to
create a system for developing manual skills in the fields
of medicine and nursing. The system uses two Phantom
Omni ® haptic devices. The prototype uses a model of
springs interconnected to simulate the deformable skin. The
models of the needle and thread are created as a chain
of spheres interconnected as a segment, which facilitates
the flexibility of the elements and allows a simple way to
reprodcure thread trimming. The FTL algorithm was used
to simulate the suture thread; however, FTL was modified to
use springs and springs with mass as the joints of the thread.
This approach provide a realistic sensation. Furthermore,
bending can obtained by adding torsion springs in the model.
A recent work in the suture field is the one made by
Ricardez et al. [26] that was focused on generating an exter-
nal suture environment named SutureHap. This simulator
simulates sensations that are perceived in medical rooms or
offices, as can be seen in Fig. 4. This feature enables a new
alternative in the learning process of doctors. The system is
based on the architecture proposed by [28]. SutureHap used
NVIDIA ® PhysX ® physical engine, OpenGL ® to ren-
der the graphical environment, and Phantom Omni ® hap-
tic devices. The system is based on the elaboration of a
suturing knot using a real technique, which was consulted
among medical staff.
Fig. 4 SutureHap environment
created by Ricardez et al. [26]
The left image shows a user
performing the stitching process
in the simulator. The use of two
Phantom Omni ® haptic
devices is implemented to
recreate similar conditions as
the ones experienced in real
stitching process. On the right
side a close-up of the virtual
environment can be seen
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 5 of 22
104
For haptic rendering, three blocks were developed. Col-
lision detection and calculation of force feedback response
between the cloth and the haptic cursor were performed by
using the simplified model, where a novel algorithm was
used. This algorithm is based on the addition of multiple
rays that are emanating from the center of the haptic avatar
in different directions. Finally, response force between solid
objects was developed according to the ”penalty method”
standard technique.
In the environment of Ricardez et al. further changes
such as improvement of interactions between objects in the
scene, and the implementation of collision handling and
haptic feedback between surgical tools should be considered
to improve the performance of the simulator.
Both Jia and Pan and Payandeh and Shi do not implement
or use proper medical tools. The incorporation of tweezers
with realistic appearance to the simulator will show students
the correct tools to use in operations and surgical tasks, as
Ricardez et al. did. Moreover, by simulating physical prop-
erties of tools, such as shape, students will learn how to
interact with them and take them into consideration in the
workspace. Finally, another aspect that Ricardez et al. and
Payandeh and Shi should consider to provide is appropriate
space location. Sometimes, students could get lost if they do
not perceive a visual cue in navigation. Therefore, the addi-
tion of shadows of objects could improve the perception of
the 3D environment.
Palpation
Palpation is the process where surgeons analyze, via their
fingers, tissues or organs to detect anomalies on the surface.
Stiffness is essential in this medical procedure. Areas that
are stiffer than other can be considered as potential tumors.
Therefore, correct calculation of force feedback is neces-
sary during the creation of virtual simulators with haptic
devices.
Li et al. [29] developed a tumor location simulator
based on soft tissue probing data. They used a Microsoft
® Kinect ® device to create a tissue model using depth data
from a silicone phantom tissue and Finite Element Model
(FEM) techniques. This enables the skin to be a geometrical
deformable soft tissue that can be modified in real time. The
novelty of this study is the use of a rolling indentation sen-
sor to obtain friction and stiffness values, which are stored
in a look-up table. Therefore, the force feedback to the user
is based on the values from the table that is accessed during
the simulation.
A case test study was made with twenty students, who
used the phantom tissue and the simulator. They were asked
to identify two zones that are stiffer than others. For the sim-
ulator, they used a Phantom Omni ® to navigate the system.
Results showed that the simulator could be seen as a feasi-
ble and efficient alternative solution of manual palpation to
train students in this medical field.
Another palpation simulator is described in the work
of Ullrich and Kuhlen [30]. The system implements nee-
dle insertion features, which is a task that is usually
done after palpation. In their approach, the authors mod-
eled a deformable skin using FEM methods and tetrahe-
dral meshes. For collision detection, they used the Bullet
® Physics Library [31]. The simulation implements the use
of hand models and illumination to provide space location
cues; therefore, the authors proposed a new algorithm for
tissue dragging to provide proper interactions. The simu-
lator uses two Phantom Omni ® haptic devices; however,
Ullrich and Kuhlen modified the end effector of one to pro-
vide a lightweight palpation pad (Fig. 5). This enables the
haptic device to be used by two fingers, which is the mini-
mum number of fingers used during palpation. The system
was evaluated by 23 beginner anesthesiology students and
17 experts, where results established average acceptance of
the simulator. The simulator should be modified and better
improvements of the hardware should be included; however,
the results also showed that the modification of the hap-
tic device provided better sensations that the ones that are
experienced with the original stylus.
Finally, modifications to typical work stations have been
made in this area, as the incorporation of Augmented Reality
(AR). PalpSim is a simulator made by Coles et al. [32]. This
simulator can be seen in Fig. 6. PalpSim was designed to
replicate real scenarios in virtual environments by using AR.
Fig. 5 Palpation environments
have been developed by
modifying current haptic
devices. Ullrich and Kuhlen
developed one where they use a
lightweight palpation pad. [30].
Left figure shows current
rendering of the virtual
environment. Right figure
displays a user using the
environment. It can be seen the
modification to the haptic device
on the left hand
104
Page 6 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Fig. 6 Another simulator that
modified haptic devices is the
one developed by Coles et al.
[32]. This simulator uses two
Falcon ® haptic devices
coupled with a palpation pad
(right side). Additionally, the
authors used Augmented Reality
techniques to provide a realistic
approach (left side)
In their workstation, the authors have guaranteed visuohap-
tic alignment by fixing a LCD display and using a camera
under it to capture users’ hands movements. By doing
the latter, the authors could use chroma-key techniques to
attain AR. Therefore, users can see in the screen the virtual
environment with their hands’ real time movements.
Coles et al. created a work station where the user han-
dles three haptic devices under the LCD screen: two Falcon
® haptic devices are coupled to emulate palpation, and one
Phantom Omni ® haptic device to manipulable the suture
insertion task. The end effector of both devices were mod-
ified to provide real sensation for the tasks. Additionally,
the authors did in vivo force measurement for palpation and
needle insertion tasks. Data obtained were used to calculate
and recreate force feedback in the simulator. The simula-
tor was validated by a user test, where seven experts in the
field used the workstation. At the end of the simulation, they
were asked to answer a 29 question survey to provide feed-
back, and it was strongly agreed that the simulator provides
realistic and correct stimuli.
Dental procedures
Dental training has been done using haptics feedback with
Phantom Head ® [33] or artificial teeth. However, these
methods present similar limitations as other surgical areas,
such as spatial location difficulties. Ethical constraints pro-
hibit the use of real human teeth, and different teeth materi-
als lack the appropriate standards or they can be used only
once per procedure on the same tooth.
A simulator for typical dental procedures called hapTEL
was created by Tse et al. [34] and it allows dental drilling,
caries removal, and cavity preparation for tooth restora-
tion. In the first stages of hapTEL, Falcon ® and Force
Dimension ® Omega 3 ® haptic devices were used. The
results stated that the quality of haptic rendering needed
to be improved and modifications to the physical environ-
ment were necessary that were implemented in a second
prototype. Falcon ® devices were modified by adding an
additional 6-DoF passive measurement device, and they
were mounted in an upward position. Additionally, a mag-
netic ball bearing socket system was developed to provide
180◦of rotation. This socket system avoided the presence
of singularities.
The simulation uses polygonal models that were con-
verted into tetrahedra by Tetgen ® [35]. The haptic algo-
rithm to render forces displays four different types of mate-
rials and physical properties: enamel, dentine, pulp, and
cavity. hapTEL novelty includes the use of different force
feedback depending on the material, but mainly the addition
of a device to the Falcon ®. This setup improved the real-
ism of the virtual mouth model and let students feel as if
they were in a typical dental operation.
Another common field of dental procedures is oral
implant therapy. It has been accepted worldwide as an
integral part of dental practice and it has become even
more important over the past few years. The placement
of implants takes into consideration anatomically complex
operation sites in the cranio-maxillofacial region, which
increase the risk of damage in operations. Computer-aided
surgeries have helped students improve their skills; how-
ever, their application in dental implant surgery is rarely
reported.
A virtual training system for oral implantation was devel-
oped by Chen et al. [36]. CAPPOIS (Computer Assisted
Preoperative Planning for Oral Implant Surgery) helps
users establish a medical environment, and lets users trans-
fer the data to the training station. Chen et al. stated that this
pilot study proved that CAPPOIS helps inexperienced doc-
tors grasp the feel of the osteotomy procedure during dental
implant surgery. However, more clinical cases need to be
done to show the feasibility and reliability of CAPPOIS.
CAPPOIS used various algorithms in the field of computer
graphics, and several medical image processing methods
are involved, including: DICOM ® file parsing, image
segmentation and 3D-visualization, surface decimation, cut-
ting, spatial search and 3D distance computing, volume
measurement, spline curve generation, multi(curved)-planar
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 7 of 22
104
reconstruction, registration, among others. CAPPOIS was
implemented by using Chai3D ® and Qt ®, and the sys-
tem uses Omega 6 ® haptic device from Force Dimension
®. Additionally, CAPPOIS allows the use of 3D glasses
to view the work place in 3D. This environment was made
to guide users in preoperative planning. Moreover, CAP-
POIS allows users perceive the position and orientation of
oral implants, do bone density analysis and bone volume
measurements for maxillary defects, among others.
Soft tissue simulation has been studied extensively in
computer graphics area [18]. A recent research made by
Hui and Dang-xiao in the area has expanded this topic by
including bimanual interaction to attain practical applica-
tions in the medical field [38]. They developed a dental
surgery focused on the interactions between the dental tools
and tissues, in this case cheeks and tongue. They based their
deformation model on a mass-spring model. The novel part
of their work is the addition of a special kind of springs,
”returning spring”. This spring enable their meshes to be
incompressible and resistant to bending by connecting each
mass of the mesh to its original position.
Force feedback provided to the user is calculated from
the penetration depth made by the tip of the tool. Hui and
Dang-xiao simplified the interaction of the tools and the
deformable skin as a case of rigid bodies. Therefore, only
the tip of the tool is interacting with the mesh and the
force that is acting on the mesh is calculated by distributing
the force applied to the contact point to all of its neighbor
vertexes.
They applied their approach to a virtual simulator where
they modeled a face, in which cheeks are made up of 143
masses and 951 springs and the tongue is made up of 213
masses and 1747 springs. Hui and Dang-xiao used two
Phantom Omni haptic devices in the simulator, and they
modeled their cursors as a Mouth Mirror and a Dental
Explorer for exploration and interaction purposes.
One type of teaching-learning techniques used in edu-
cation are collaborative environments where students can
interact among them or with a professor to solve prob-
lems and learn as a team. As stated before, TEL options
allow students to enhance their learning by allowing them to
acquire knowledge and skills via virtual environments [39].
The implementation of these environments in the medical
area can help teachers guide students in medical operations.
Kosuki and Okada developed a collaborative training sys-
tem [37]. The simulator was created using a tool called
IntelligentBox, which is a 3D visual software development
system based on the Model-View-Controller architectural
pattern [40]. The authors have implemented components for
medical operations in IntelligentBox, and they have devel-
oped specific modules for touch and drilling actions to
design a dental training environment (Fig. 7).
IntelligentBox defines 3D objects as polygonal models,
which are represented as a set of several polygons. For
object deformations, the system uses a very simple method
based on the movements of the haptic device pointer. This
method enables the user to use push and pull interaction on
the environment. On the side of collision detection, Intel-
ligentBox solves an equation based on the vertex locations
and the interaction point, where only if the interaction point
is the opposite side of the vertex, the system detects a colli-
sion. Finally, the dental training station uses Phantom Omni
® haptic device and IntelligentBox provides a distributed
model sharing mechanism called RoomBoxes. RoomBoxes
Fig. 7 Current prototype for
typical dental procedures made
by Kosuki and Okada [37]. The
simulator was made using
IntelligentBox, and it provides
students a collaborative
environment where they can
work in turns to solve a task
104
Page 8 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
provides students a virtual environment in which they can
share user-operation events.
Evaluations of the learning curve and acquisition of skills
using haptic technologies have been reviewed in previous
work [41]. Assessment and evaluation of students training
can be found in the literature [42]. Wang et al. [42] designed
a simulator called iDental to provide a preliminary user eval-
uation. Teeth models were obtained via point-cloud data
from Computed Tomography (CT) images and scans and
were refined using 3ds Max ®. The result is a VRML file
that is the input for the virtual environment. The meshes of
tissues for rigid and elastic objects are handled as triangles,
and GHOST SKD ® handled collision [43].
The simulator uses one Phantom Desktop ® haptic
device and runs on a workstation with one display. Perfor-
mance and user tests with 10 dentists and 19 postgraduate
students with one to two years of experience in dental proce-
dures were made. Results obtained showed that the current
simulator provides relative realism similar to that experi-
enced with real patients. The results suggest that virtual
reality simulators give undergraduate students more flexible
training experiences. However, the current simulator needs
to improve its haptic and graphic feedback, as well as the
physical hardware, which is not consistent with the current
technique.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy procedures examine the interior of a hollow
organ or cavity of the body using an endoscope. Neuro-
surgery is one of the surgical specialties within endoscopy
with the highest risks [44]. It requires a safe manipulation of
instruments around fragile tissues; consequently, the most
frequently reported errors in neurosurgery are technical ones
[45].
Delorme et al. [46] developed NeuroTouch ®, a virtual
simulator for cranial microsurgery training (Fig. 8). The
neurosurgical simulator was developed using a physic-based
engine and is composed of a 3D graphics rendering sys-
tem (stereoscope), haptic devices, other controls, and one
or two computers. Two different types of haptic systems
can be used: the Phantom Desktop ® or a Freedom 6S
® from MPB Technologies ®. Delorme et al. developed
a software for the simulations to design and mimic a neu-
rosurgical microscope. The simulation uses multiple rates:
graphics at 60 Hz, haptics at 1k Hz, and tissue mechanics
at 100 Hz. NeuroTouch was developed to enable residents
to practice their skills in tumor-debulking and tumor cauter-
ization tasks. This system computes the deformation of the
tissues and topology changes according to tissue rupture,
cut, or removal. The mechanical behavior of tissues is mod-
eled as viscoelastic solids using a quasilinear viscoelastic
constitutive model for the viscous part of the environment.
Fig. 8 Neurosurgery resident testing a NeuroTouch prototype [46].
The workstation implements a stereoscope as an immersion device
to help the user locate himself in the virtual world. The system uses
two Freedom 6S ® haptic devices. Picture comes from the National
Research Council Canada
NeuroTouch is a virtual simulator with haptic feedback
that was designed for the acquisition and assessment of
technical skills involved in craniotomy-based procedures.
Delorme et al. stated that usability feedback from doctors
provided NeuroTouch ® ways to improve its functionality.
They have praised the visual portion of the simulator, and
suggested modifications in the ergonomic design. Finally,
by adding a modification of parameters of the model, this
system can be extended to cover patient-specific operations,
which would increase the adaptability of the environment
and cover a wider range of scenarios.
Another simulator was developed by Jiang et al. [47]
and it allows a simulation of endoscopic third ventricu-
lostomy. This procedure is used to treat hydrocephalus by
making a perforation in the floor of the third ventricle of the
brain under endoscopic guidance. Jiang et al. adapted the
stereoscope design by Delorme et al. The proposed system
adapted the NeuroTouch ® microneurosurgery to achieve
the practices needed in the simulation. They used four mir-
rors and a screen instead of two mirrors and two screens. To
provide haptic feedback, a neuro-endoscope handle with a
blunt probe instrument inserted in its working channel was
mounted on a Phantom Omni ® haptic device. The sim-
ulator was created using their software simulation engine
Blade. Jiang et al. designed the environment through close
collaboration with the end-users. It enables two tasks: one
is the burr-hole position and entry orientation selection,
and the second is the navigation inside the ventricular sys-
tem, reaching the third ventricle and perforating the third
ventricle floor.
Other studies have focused on developing prototypes of
other kinds of endoscopic surgeries. Previous work in the
area of endonasal endoscopy made by Neubauer [48], used
a joystick to navigate and access tumor areas in the envi-
ronment. This approach reduces the realism of the simulator
due to its lack of haptic interactions with tools. Additionally,
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 9 of 22
104
they did not implement deformations modules of tissues due
to its navigation nature. Perez-Gutierrez et al. [49]. divided
a research study in three steps to develop an endoscopic
endonasal haptic surgery simulator and they simulated a
rigid endoscope device with 4-DoF and modeled the nasal
tissue.
Perez-Gutierrez et al. used a force feedback joystick
to provide the haptic interaction. The simulator provides
the user graphical feedback using the camera movements
in the virtual environment, and through the joystick, the
user can sense the interaction forces to reach the tumor,
as can be seen in Fig. 9. The system was created using
Nukak3D ® [50]. In this research, further work should
be considered to improve aspects such as immersion and
interaction.
Advances in endoscopy simulators can also be found
in the area of surgical suturing. Punak et al. developed a
surgical suturing simulator for wound closure using the sim-
ulation of the Covidien ® (previously known as Autosuture
®) Endo Stich ® suturing tool in [51]. The simulator uses
two Phantom Omni ® haptic devices: one for a grasper and
the other for the simulated Endo Stich ® suturing device.
The model of the wound is based on FEM techniques,
which in this case used the linear hexahedral model. Addi-
tionally, the wound is simulated as a triangular surface mesh
embedded in the linear hexahedral. This allowed Punak
et al. to modify the surface of the wound or change the grid
resolution of the mesh without changing the global environ-
ment . On the other hand, the suture model was based on
a simplified Cosserat theory of elastic rods, which uses the
CoRDE model [52], enabling the model to be discretized
into a coupling of a chain of mass points and a chain of
orientations. The simulator uses bounding volumes in the
tools and BVH for the collision detection of between the
open wound and the thread. Finally, they used a finite state
machine to animate the knot tying sequence.
The suture was simulated with 100 points, and the trian-
gular surface mesh of the wound was composed of 2,178
vertices and 4,352 triangles. The simulation ran at 20 fps
when there were null or minor intersections, and it ran at
approximately 10 fps with complex collisions and inter-
actions. Punak et al. aimed to create low-cost and simple
simulators that help trainees learn surgical skills. User test-
ing of the system is necessary to observe if the environment
provides realistic behavior and allows the user to be trained
in the correct way. Additionally, diversity of wounds and
methods of suture are being planned. Most of the surgical
procedures are done with at least 6 DoF. However, Punak
et al. proposed to test if simulators with three degrees of
force feedback can be a feasible option instead of using
a higher cost simulator offering more degrees of force
feedback, so further field research should be done.
Laparoscopy
One of the most common surgeries is laparoscopic chole-
cystectomy, which is the removal of a diseased gallblad-
der. This surgery is often used as the training case for
laparoscopy due to its high frequency and perceived low
risk. Park et al. [53] developed a low cost virtual real-
ity surgical simulator. It consists of three elements: virtual
reality, motion sensor, and haptic feedback. The authors
used the Microsoft ® Kinect ® 3D camera to capture and
store information associated with the movements of the
body of a user. To provide haptic feedback, this work uses
Nintendo ® Wiimote ® controllers.
To create the virtual environment, Park et al. construct
an expert knowledge database derived from video footage
taken from a surgical endoscope during real cholecystec-
tomy operations (Fig 10). A set of 15 key stages were
defined and a database links the corresponding image
frames of the video footage to the relevant key stages
that were used to construct an interactive video tutorial.
Finally, the system uses Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) to
compare the actions of users with actions from the expert
knowledge database.
Fig. 9 Current visualization for
an endoscope approaching to the
middle turbinate in an endonasal
haptic surgery simulator made
by Perez-Gutierrez et al. [49]
104
Page 10 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Fig. 10 Virtual reality
simulator made by Park et al. for
a laparoscopic operation. The
image depicts the video tutorial
that users can watch (right), and
the surgical instruments that the
user manipulates using
Wiimotes ® (left) [53]
By using Wiimotes ® and the Kinect ® sensor, it is
possible to capture the actions of the user. However, the
environment loses realism due to the fact that it lacks sim-
ulated physical surgical devices. Laparoscopic workstations
usually involve the handling of physical parts while the sur-
geon proceeds with the operation. However, the workstation
proposed by Park et al. was aimed as an in-home training
system for students, and it can help them practice anywhere.
Another low cost training simulator is eLaparo4D, which
was created by Gaudina et al. [54]. They designed train-
ing exercises for medicine students in realistic scenarios
of videolaparoscopic surgeries. The system is based on a
node.js application server, which enables all the visualiza-
tion, communications and administration. The user interface
uses HTML5 ®, which runs a Unity3D ® engine plugin
[55]. The meshes in the simulation were developed in
Blender ® 3D [56].
Haptic feedback is provided by using three Phantom
Omni ®, where the first two are used as tool handlers
(grasper, hook or scissors) and the third one is used to
move the camera within the virtual abdomen. By using
three haptic devices, students would experience a realis-
tic approach of the laparoscopic equipment. Gaudina et al.
used an Arduino ® board connected to a vibrating motor
that also has a vibration feedback. Additionally, the way the
simulator was made allows haptic-based remote guidance
provided by a supervisor. This guidance can be provided via
web to show students the proper way to execute a critical
task. Finally, the system enables users to have their own pro-
file, which is tracked over time and users can monitor their
progress. The system was designed in a way in which each
exercise has its allowed and not allowed actions, which adds
or subtracts points from the user’s score.
Gaudina et al. stated that eLaparo4D has many aspects
that need to be improved. One is the physical modeling to
simulate the interactions of elements properly, such as body
parts that could interfere with the surgical procedure. More-
over, the definition of exercises in the simulator are being
developed to reach a certain level of mastery. Finally, sur-
gical procedures need to provide performance feedback, so
eLaparo4D is evaluating the implementation of a tracking
module of the students’ learning curve.
Serious games are employed to teach skills on surgery-
based training applications. Serious games provide high
fidelity simulations of environments and situations. De Pao-
lis presented a serious game for training suture skills in
laparoscopic surgery [57]. The system is focused on phys-
ical modeling, and it established a set of parameters to
determine the development of trainees. The simulator uses
a pair of haptic devices, which can be two Phantom Omni
® or two Falcon ® using the multidevice HAPI ® library.
The system uses PhysX ® physics engine and Ogre3D
® graphics engine [58].
De Paolis used the mass-spring method to design the tis-
sue in PhysX ®, and he used Ogre3D ® to render the tissue.
On the other hand, the thread model was built using follow-
the-leader techniques in PhysX ®. The thread is composed
of cylinders that are connected through a spherical joint.
This enables the rotation of the elements relative to each
other. The architecture of the system was developed using
the architectural pattern of Model-View-Controller, which
manages the behavior and responses of the environment and
objects.
In the assessment of suturing procedure, De Paolis con-
sidered the following parameters to evaluate the medical
process: duration time, accuracy, force peak, tissue damage,
angle of entry, and needle distance. The software architec-
ture was developed using the architectural pattern Model-
View-Controller, which manages the behavior of objects in
the environment, responds to requests for information about
their states and to instructions to change state. De Paolis
[57] concluded that the serious game of laparoscopic sutur-
ing could be improved by modifying some aspects of the
environment. One is improving the interaction between the
tissue and suture thread, which is one of the areas in suture
modeling that is currently researched.
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 11 of 22
104
Other improvements in the area of laparoscopic simu-
lators include the addition of visual effects. For instance,
smoke and bleeding models are not developed due to its
lesser significance compared to other major modules, such
as collision detection and physics simulation. Neverthe-
less, Halic and De developed a GPU based method to
implement realistic smoke and bleeding effects in virtual
reality simulators [59] (Fig. 11). These effects were applied
in the Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric Banding (LAGB)
simulator [60].
In order to obtain the desired effects, Halic and De ana-
lyzed videos obtained from LAGB and they identified two
different kinds of smoke effects. One is the environmental
smoke effect, which often obstructs the camera view. The
other is the smoke effect originated at the tip of the cautery
tool that spreads around the tissue slowly. Both types are
blended to generate the final environment. For bleeding
effects, an attribute variable was assigned to all vertexes of
the mesh structure. The processing is made when the inter-
polated value of this variable is compared with the noise
texture. If it exceeds a certain value, bleeding is rendered in
that particular fragment.
The simulator and the effects were written with GLSL
® shader. The smoke video fetching and bleeding render-
ing were performed within the same shader. Halic and De
used the GPU for bleeding and smoke simulation; therefore,
it decreased the computational load of the CPU with a slight
reduction in the rendering performance. However, the per-
formance is better compared to a full-fledged simulation of
both effects. Halic and De specified that they are planning
to optimize the texture processing in CPU and CPU-GPU
data transfer to avoid the loss of performance obtained.
Finally, assistant modules are currently being applied in
the area of virtual simulators, where one of the most com-
mon is the technique of Virtual Fixtures (VF). VF is a
technique that is used to guide students while they are work-
ing on a specific task. VF applies forces in the haptic device
to maintain the students outside of prohibited work space
areas. Research made by Hernansanz et al. is focused on VF
[61]. The paper discusses the advantages of VR to improve
basic learning skills in laparoscopic surgery. They used the
Skill-Rule-Knowledge taxonomy [62] to assess assisting
technologies applied in abilities acquisition.
Hernansanz et al. implemented as VF: visual guidance,
audio guidance, motion scaling, magnification, and force
feedback. These provide the student an assistance environ-
ment. The simulator that Hernansanz et al. used was the
one developed by Zerbato [63]. The system uses a single
Phantom Omni ® haptic device.
Orthopaedics
Arthroscopy [9] is another medical surgery that has been
implemented in virtual environments. Arthroscopic proce-
dures are performed to evaluate or treat orthopaedic condi-
tions. Heng et al. developed a virtual reality system for knee
arthroscopic surgery using OpenGL ® and C++ [73]. They
created soft tissue deformable model using Finite-Element
Analysis (FEA) with realistic feedback. They developed
their own 4-DoF haptic device with 3-Degrees of Force
Feedback (DoFF) to satisfy their requirements, and they
used slides from the Visible Human Project image dataset
combined with CT real images to obtain better visual real-
ism. In this simulator, two types of meshes are generated:
one to model non-deformable organs (i.e., bones), and
the other using tetrahedral meshes to represent deformable
organs. Using an in-house architecture, these two meshes
are rendered in a preprocessing phase of the system. To
improve the performance, they propose regions with dif-
ferent properties to balance the computation time and the
Fig. 11 In order to promote realism in simulators, Halic and De developed (a) smoke effects and (b) bleeding effects [59]. These effects were
applied to LAGB simulator [60]
104
Page 12 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Fig. 12 Chen and He developed
a bone drilling simulator, where
users can feel, by force
feedback, the different
components of the bone [64]. In
figure (a) a user is performing
the task using a Phantom
Premium ®, and on figure (b) a
close-up of the environment can
be seen
level of simulation realism. Finally, the simulator devel-
oped procedures to cut tetrahedral meshes and implemented
optimized collision detection methods. An endoscope and a
cutter were modeled to provide real tool models in this sim-
ulation. The simulator includes the functionality to record
the surgical process. This feature enables medical students
to playback the recorded procedure. This system was eval-
uated by medical professionals and the results reveal a
satisfactory tactile feedback.
A typical task in orthopaedics is bone drilling. This pro-
cess is an essential step before the insertion of screws or
pins. Chen and He created a simulator for bone drilling of
a femur bone in a hip fracture surgery [64]. This simulator
can be seen in Fig. 12. The key feature of this study is the
use of a Phantom Premium ®, which provide 6 DoFF. In the
simulator, the bone is modeled as a voxel, which is obtained
from CT or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans and
the drilling probe is modeled as a cylindrical volume.
In this simulator two important aspects for drilling were
taken into consideration: bone properties and drill param-
eters. The bone properties was modeled according to its
heterogeneity (hyaline cartilage, spongy bone, marrow cav-
ity, and compact bone). For drill parameters, drill speed,
type of drills and feed rates were considered. Finally, calcu-
lation of force feedback (drilling force and rolling torque)
is based on the material removal rate, which depends on
drill diameter and feed-rate. Additionally, the travel distance
of the drill is calculated using feed-rate and time interval
parameters.
In orthopaedics, one specific surgery process for frac-
tures on the human femur is the Less Invasive Stabilization
System (LISS). LISS allows surgeons to insert a percuta-
neous plate and fix it in the distal femur with screws to help
bones recover from fractures. For this operation, Cecil et al.
developed a virtual collaborative simulator for LISS training
[65]. The simulator uses FEM approach to model deforma-
tions when surgical tools interact with the surfaces of the
bone (Fig. 13).
The importance of this research was the implementation
of the collaborative mode. Each user has their own virtual
environment on their work station; the control of the simula-
tion remains with a specific user until he grants permissions
Fig. 13 Another environment that uses the technique of collaborative
learning is the one made by Cecil et al. [65]. Picture on the right shows
the surgery process for fractures on the human femur was designed. By
applying the methodology of collaborative environments, Cecil et al.
enables users to practice the surgery process, and on another work-
station an expert surgeon can check the process. On the right side, a
close-up of the virtual simulator can be seen
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 13 of 22
104
to another user, in a token-based approach. In addition to
the collaborative mode, Cecil et al. designed this simulator
as two different platforms to be used as an evaluation and
planning tool for surgeons. The first platform is a simulator,
which was created using C++ and Chai3D ®. This simula-
tor incorporates a Phantom Omni ® haptic device to interact
with the environment and obtain force feedback from it. The
second platform was created to visualize the surgery process
obtained in the process. This system was considered as a
tool to help surgeons teach the process and evaluate medical
residents.
Miscellaneous procedures
Additional to the previous medical areas, there have been
simulators in other specific areas or tasks. One of them is
in the training of biopsy, which is the sampling of cells or
tissues for examination. This procedure is most commonly
performed to evaluate whether there are inflammatory or
cancerous conditions in organs. Training of this task can
only be performed on live patients, where consequent risks
may occur in patients. Therefore, the importance of creating
systems that provide visual realism and controlled environ-
ments is emphasized. In this area, Ni et al. developed a
virtual reality simulator for Ultrasound-Guided (UG) liver
biopsy training [66].
The authors combined images obtained from CT with
ultrasound images to provide higher realism. In addition, the
generated deformable model is able to simulate the breath-
ing of a patient by changing controlled parameters. For hap-
tic feedback, they used two haptic devices that are managed
in independent routines, a Phantom Omni ® to simulate
an ultrasonic scanning probe and a Phantom Premium to
handle the virtual needle.
Ni et al. show in the simulator the liver model and the
ultrasonic sensor image that can be seen in real opera-
tions, as can be seen in Fig. 14. User tests were made to
evaluate different aspects of realism, such as images and
tactile effects. The evaluation was conducted with experts
and trainees, where satisfactory results were obtained. Nev-
ertheless, it was highlighted that the performance of experts
is not as high as expected when breathing is enabled in the
simulation.
A Transrectal Ultrasound (TRUS) guided prostate
biopsy virtual environment using haptic devices has been
developed in recent studies [67]. Selmi et al. designed
a complete learning environment where various exercises
were implemented to provide didactic learning. To achieve
this goal, the dedicated clinical case database from Koelis
® UroStation ® system was connected to the system
to provide diverse patient cases. This database covers a
large variety of important situations that surgeons typically
encounter during real surgeries.
Fig. 14 Ni et al. developed a virtual biopsy simulator [66]. In this, the
user can perfom interactive anatomical navigations, where according
to the movements of the probe, a CT view that corresponds to it is
shown
The simulator let practitioners use a Phantom Omni
® haptic device to navigate the environment on one hand,
and on the other hand they use CamiTK ® GUI [68], which
provides data and feedback to the user during the simula-
tion. Moreover, the simulator allows practitioners to access
their performance record, such as average score and proce-
dure average time of the procedure. Additionally, to improve
realism, students have to complete a checklist, which is
typically done prior to the operation.
The simulator of Selmi et al. is used in two phases. In the
first one, students are asked to perform seven specific exer-
cises, which help them to understand the procedures during
the biopsy and let them practice hand-eye interaction in the
simulator. The second phase offers them the option to per-
form a virtual biopsy process, where the student can select
the desired position to do the biopsy (decubitus or lateral)
and the location to start it (left central base, left lateral base,
right central base or right lateral base).
Training environments have also been created for liver
surgery. Yi et al. proposed a method to adapt and calibrate
shape and size of organs by establishing feature points on
their surface [69]. The organs are formed by triangle meshes
that follow the spring-mass damper model to achieve defor-
mations. Yi et al. used a simplified Lin-Canny algorithm to
calculate the nearest point from the surgical tool in order
to deploy the corresponding interaction forces and collision
detection. This simulator enables medical students practice
surgeries in virtual environments by applying images of
patient’s organs in the simulator.
Virtual training environments have also been designed in
optometry. Optometry is usually practiced in close super-
vision of experts due to the fact that these procedures are
time-consuming and unrepeatable. Tradicional techniques
in the area focus on the use of artificial or bull eyes. Med-
ical students in optometry need training environments to
104
Page 14 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
develop their skills with superior realism. Wei et al. [70]
created an immersive extendable and configurable work sta-
tion that implements the use of a Phantom Omni ® haptic
device and a Head Mounted Display (HMD) to provide AR
techniques. This work station can be seen in Fig. 15. The
simulation was developed using C++ and Chai3D ®. The
eye model was implemented as a polygonal mesh with sep-
arate component and textures. By doingthis segmentation,
interaction between the surgical tools and the eye provide
different physical properties, according to the region that the
user is navigating. Moreover, the model was built implicitly
from the interactions with the deformable object; therefore,
data-driven models were used in this simulator.
In the virtual environment, illumination and needle
sharpness modification were adapted to provide the best
suitable and similar conditions as the ones experienced dur-
ing real surgeries . Additionally,, the simulator considered
the use of the HMD to adjust the visual rendering effect,
and AR techniques to modify the slit lamp orientation dur-
ing the simulation. Finally, the simulator was tested by five
optometry students who already knew the procedures. They
had to perform five different tests and their performance was
recorded by the system. By using the simulator, they were
evaluated by assessing 1) distance estimation between the
tool and the eye, 2) foreign body location, 3) foreign body
removal task, 4) the angle and position of the needle, and 5)
needle insertion.
The authors stated that in the first trials made by the
students, they had bad performance because they were still
unfamiliar with the workstation. The principal problem was
in the area of space location (Z-axis or depth). At the end of
the evaluation, students were asked to answer a survey about
the system. In this questionnaire, immersion, interactivity
and effectiveness of the system were asked. Most students
agreed that the simulator could enable users to finish the
tasks faster and safer due to the force feedback provided on
their hand.
Besides advances in training students for specific medi-
cal tasks, physio-therapeutic systems have been made using
haptics to relieve the work load of physiotherapists. Surg-
eries are usually followed by a rehabilitation program. Typi-
cal feedback provided to patients is given using audiovisual
cues [71]. However, in some cases, using a mechanical or
haptic feedback can be implemented as an alternative or
complement treatment. A recent research made by Rajanna
et al. proposed a system called KinoHaptics, which is an
autonomous, wearable, haptic device to help during the
recovery process of patients [72].
KinoHaptics hardware is based on an in-house devel-
oped armband (with vibration motors), and a Kinect ®
2.0 to track the motion of users. By adding the armband
with vibro-haptic feedback, Rajanna et al. simulates a phys-
iotherapist that accompanies patients during the training
session. Kinect ® 2.0 is used to capture the movement
of the patient to recreate it in a virtual scheme. The
virtual scheme and the user interface were made using
Unity3D ® framework.
The system was tested by 14 students. Test subjects
were chosen according to the following categories: has
suffered an injury, has limited motion in their limbs, and
has no prior injury or limited motion of their limbs.
Finally, results shows that users liked KinoHaptics and
felt it convenient to be used for self-care after having a
surgery.
Discussion
In this section we provide a comparison and summary of
technical aspects used in haptic virtual simulations. Then
we discuss the visual realism of the simulations and then we
focus on the training aspects of virtual environments. The
papers discussed in this work are summarized in Tables 1
and 2.
Fig. 15 A workstation for
optometry tasks was developed
by Wei et al. [70]. The
workstation provides a realistic
approach to real operations.
Figure (a) shows that the system
is made from a head display and
the equipment that is used in the
operation. Additionally, a
display and a Phantom Omni are
mounted. On figure (b)
screenshot of the body removal
task is shown
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 15 of 22
104
Table 1 Comparison of haptic simulations
Author
Medical
HaD
Modification
Number
DoF
DoFF
Type
Task performed
Tools simulated
Gravity
Space
LF to
area
to HaD
to HaD
of FF
location
user
Jia and Pan [23]
Stitching
Desktop
No
1
6
3
Force
Close a wound
Needle
No
Shadows
No
Payandeh and Shi [25]
Stitching
Omni
No
2
6
3
Force
Close a wound
Needle and
No
None
No
Needle Driver
Ricardez et al. [26]
Stitching
Omni
No
2
6
3
Force
Close a wound
Needle, Needle
No
None
No
Holder and
Tweezers
Choi et al. [27]
Stitching
Omni
No
2
6
3
Force
Close a wound
−
No
None
No
Li et al. [29]
Palpation
Omni
No
1
6
3
Force
Tumor
−
No
None
No
Localization
Ullrich and Kuhlen [30]
Palpation
Omni
Yes
2
6
3
Force
Palpation and
Hands and Needle
No
Virtual Reality
No
Needle Insertion
Coles et al. [32]
Palpation
Falcon and Omni
Yes
2/1
3/6
3
Force
Palpation and
Hands and Needle
No
None
No
Needle
Insertion
Tse et al. [34]
Dental
Falcon
Yes
1
3
6
Force
Drilling, Caries
Dental Drill
No
3D LCD
No
removal and
Cavity preparation
Chen et al. [36]
Dental
Omega 6
No
1
4
3
Force
Oral implants
Dental Drill
No
3D LCD
Yes
Hui and Dang-xiao [38]
Dental
Desktop and Omni
No
2
6
3
Force
Manipulation of
Mouth Mirror
No
None
No
Cheek and
and Dental
Tongue
Explorer
Kosuki and Okada [37]
Dental
Omni
No
1
6
3
Force
Touch and Drilling
−
No
None
Yes
Wang et al. [42]
Dental
Desktop
No
1
6
3
Force
Remove calculus
Dental Drill
No
None
No
Delorme et al. [46]
Endoscopy
Freedom 6s
No
2
6
3
Force
Tumor-debulking
Ultrasonic
No
Stereoscope
No
and Tumor
Aspirator, Bipolar
cauterization
Electrocustery
tasks
and Microscissors
Jiang et al. [47].
Endoscopy
Omni
Yes
2
6
3
Force
Endoscopic third
Probe
No
None
Yes
ventriculostomy
Perez-Gutierrez et al. [49]
Endoscopy
Joystick
No
1
1
No
Vibration
Endoscopic
Rigid
No
None
No
endonasal surgery
Endoscope model
Punak et al. [51]
Endoscopy
Omni
No
2
6
3
Force
Close a wound
Tweezer and
No
Shadows
No
Needle Handler
HaD : Haptic Device, FF : Force Feedback, LF : Learning Feedback, UG : Ultrasound-Guided, TRUS : Transrectal Ultrasound
104
Page 16 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Table 2 Comparison of haptic simulations (cont)
Author
Medical
HaD
Modification
Number
DoF
DoFF
Type
Task performed
Tools simulated
Gravity
Space
LF to
area
to HaD
of HaD
of FF
user location
Park et al. [53]
Laparoscopy
Wiimote
No
2
3
No
Vibration
Cholecystectomy
2
No
Kinect
Yes
Gaudina et al. [54]
Laparoscopy
Omni
No
3
6
3
Force
Video laparoscopic
1
No
None
Yes
surgery
De Paolis [57]
Laparoscopy
Falcon or Omni
No
2
3/6
3
Force
Laparoscopic
−
Yes
None
No
suture
Halic and De [59]
Laparoscopy
Omni
No
2
6
3
Force
Laparoscopic
Tweezer
No
None
No
Adjustable Gastric
Banding task
Hernansanz et al. [61]
Laparoscopy
Desktop
No
1
6
3
Force
Video
Smoke and
No
None
No
laparoscopic
bleeding modules
surgery
Heng et al. [73]
Orthopaedics
Own device
No
2
4
3
Force
Knee Arthroscopy
Endoscope and
No
None
No
Cutter
Chen and He [64]
Orthopaedics
Premum
No
1
6
6
Force
Bone drilling
Driller
No
None
No
in hip
fracture
Cecil et al. [65]
Orthopaedics
Premium
No
1
6
6
Force
LISS surgery
Driller
No
None
Yes
Ni et al. [66]
Biopsy
Omni and Premium
No
1/1
6
3/6
Force
Liver UG biopsy
Transducer and
No
None
No
Biopsy Needle
Selmi et al. [67]
Biopsy
Omni
No
1
6
3
Force
TRUS Guided
Ultrasonic
No
None
Yes
Prostate
Scanning Probe
biopsy
and Needle
Yi et al. [69]
Liver Surgery
Omega 3
No
1
3
3
Force
Liver surgery
Cutting Probe
No
None
No
Wei et al. [70]
Optometry
Omni
No
1
6
3
Force
Optometry tasks
Foreign body
No
HMD
No
removal and
Injection procedure
Rajanna et al. [72]
Rehabilitation
Armband
No
No
No
No
Vibration
Physio-therapeutic
None
Yes
Kinect 2.0
No
tasks
HaD : Haptic Device, FF : Force Feedback, LF : Learning Feedback, UG : Ultrasound-Guided, TRUS : Transrectal Ultrasound
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 17 of 22
104
Technical comparison
Haptic devices in virtual simulators
Current simulators mainly use haptic devices with three
or six DoF. The most common ones are Falcon ® and
Phantom Omni ® due to their affordable price (Falcon
® costs around $150 - $200 US Dollar as of July 2015).
Falcon ® devices only provide 3-DoF, Phantom Omni
® provides 6-DoF, but it has only 3-DoFF. Addition-
ally, its cost is around $2,200 US Dollar, which makes
it less accessible. Several authors have attempted to com-
bine low cost haptic devices with external modules to
provide additional degrees of freedom [32, 34], or they
provide better realism by adapting surgical tools to them
[30, 47].
The prevailing used haptic devices in stitching proce-
dures are from the Phantom family. This kind of haptics
uses 6-DoF, but they only have 3-DoFF, except for the Phan-
tom Premium, which has all its DoF coupled with force
feedback. A typical task used in the development of stitch-
ing simulators is open-wound operations, where they mainly
focus the task on the dermis layer. The nature of this pro-
cedure implies that torsion is needed when the needle is
piercing the skin; consequently, simulators need to provide
6-DoF. Particularly in this area, none of the authors adapted
haptic devices or created their own to provide forces in cases
such as skin perforation by the needle.
Palpation virtual environments target to achieve sensa-
tions felt in real procedures. Palpation is a procedure that is
commonly made in parallel with needle insertion. Authors
usually adapt haptic devices with pads to provide real
sensations. Other authors focus their attention to provide
proper sensations of tumors by scanning current tumor pads.
They translated the texture and force sensations to pro-
vide better haptic feedback and rendering. Palpation may
benefit from using new haptic devices that use piezoelec-
tric sensor in gloves to enhance the sensation and depth
perception.
Dental simulators focus on the most common actions in
dental procedures, as caries and calculus removal. Applica-
tions use diverse haptic devices; nevertheless, the main aim
is the reproduction of realistic workstations. Tse et al. [34]
adapted the workstation to provide these conditions, and
also added an extension to a Falcon ® device in order to
provide 6-DoFF. Additionally, undergraduate students used
a common drill as the handler of the haptic device, which
enhanced the learning procedure. Further work in this area
could consider the addition of two haptic devices because
medical tasks are done by using two hands.
Endoscopy and laparoscopy environments belong to the
class of Minimally Invasive Surgeries (MIS). Because
this procedures need to be performed with two hands,
simulations are usually manipulated with two Phantom
Omni ® haptic devices. Virtual environments in this
area focus principally in endoscopy navigation [47, 49].
Laparoscopy simulations are commonly developed to pro-
vide practice in videolaparoscopic surgery [54, 61]. New
alternatives, such as [53], provide low-cost simulations by
using haptic devices coupled with video games by using
Wiimotes ®.
Orthopaedics environments usually focus in arthroscopic
tasks, principally drilling. In this type of simulations, FEM
should be considered. Researchers should focus on how to
model bone properties and structure. By doing this, they
can model proper interaction in drilling and force feedback.
Finally, miscellaneous procedures are being developed.
Important cases in the area are biopsies and optometry. Both
kind of simulators use Phantom Omni ®. However, manip-
ulation of tools requires 6-DoFF, as in the case of stitching.
Finally, post-surgery rehabilitation has started to add haptic
feedback as a complementary resources of audiovisual cues
[72].
In short, simulators in these areas are developed with 3-
DoFF due to their nature, where only 3-DoF are needed.
Commonly used tools in medical procedures involve manip-
ulations using triggers, so their addition to haptic devices
do not require the incorporation of more DoF such as
in [54].
Degrees of freedom and modifications
State of the art articles on medical applications focus on
developing simulations, which leaves the addition and mod-
ifications of haptic devices as another field of study. The
modification of haptic devices can be found in robotics and
robot-assisted surgeries [74]. Modification to haptic devices
usually improves haptic sensations in order to make them
closer to real surgeries or procedures [30, 32, 34, 47].
In contrast, several authors decreased the physical real-
ism in virtual simulators coupled with different haptic
devices [53] to make the simulations more affordable.
Whereas it decreases the cost of a virtual simulator for
undergraduate students by using a Kinect ® and Wiimotes
®, the type of force feedback and the form of Wiimotes
® reduced realism in the practice of skills.
Additionally, due to the technical properties of the force
feedback, only one force aiming in one direction can be
usually applied. One exception is the work of [53] that
provided vibrations as force feedback. Laparoscopic appli-
cations need to provide at least 3-DoFF. Consequently, the
Wiimote ® is not a feasible option because it only provides
104
Page 18 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
vibration as feedback. Also, twisting forces require 6-DoFF
and they are found and used rarely [34].
Visual realism
Another important aspect that should be considered in the
development of simulators is to reproduce a high level of
visual realism. Recent progress in the GPU processing and
computer graphics in general allows an extremely high level
of realism. Very few works [46, 54, 60, 61] focus on pho-
torealistic rendering and high visual quality. Most of the
works use only schematic rendering with shadow to show
the location of the probe and simple Phong shading to
depict the surfaces. Finally, only a limited number of works
simulate gravity [57].
The most commonly used visualization is displaying
the position of the probe as a sphere, sometimes with
shadow, and in some cases 3D immersion is added. There
is usually some learning required for the users to become
familiar with the system as they first need to allocate them-
selves properly in the simulator. Current simulators let users
experiment and move freely in the 3D scene before start-
ing the medical procedures, as exemplified in the work
of [26].
Users very often report the difficulty in detecting the
position of the probe in the 3D space. It is extremely impor-
tant to locate the coordinate system of the virtual 3D space
correspondingly to the real one so when the probe moves
to the right the virtual one should move in the same direc-
tion. Moreover, scaling of the virtual environment is very
important as well. In many cases the forces as well as the
sizes of the objects do not correspond to the real world.
The minimal requirement for the correct perception of the
3D location is the inclusion of shadows to locate the haptic
probe. Some works add 3D immersion to increase realism
and to add the 3D perception. The immersion is provided
either by using active 3D head mounted displays [34, 36] or
by using 2D screens with displaying in stereo [46]. The 3D
head mounted displays allow free movement, and their posi-
tion and orientation is coupled with the virtual camera, but
they are usually bound to a single user. Passive 2D screens
allow multiple users to view the scene, but the movement
of the user is not transferred to the movement of the vir-
tual camera. The most common solution is using active 3D
displays, where the position of the person performing the
procedure is critical, as for example, in the treatment of
occlusions.
One of the main challenges is to improve the way stu-
dents perceive the location of objects in space, especially
the z-axis (depth) as described in [70]. An alternative solu-
tion was made by Coles et al. [32], where the authors used
AR to ensure visual-optical alignment.
Physics
Computer graphics has provided an unprecedent progress
in simulation of physics. Recent GPU-supported physics
simulation engines such as PhysX ® [75], Havok ® [76],
Newton ® [77], or Bullet ® [31] allow simulation of fluid
dynamics, kinematics, or FEM and soft tissues. These simu-
lations are physically precise, they can use very large scenes
and meshes, and are usually provided in real time. This has
not been exploited to the full extent in the area of hap-
tic simulations for two reasons; first, users rely on existing
haptic libraries and APIs that usually do not provide access
to the most advanced and recent algorithms. Second, these
libraries are usually implemented on the GPU and they
require usage of advanced visualization techniques to be
fully used. Moreover, combining haptic feedback with those
libraries is non-trivial. Nevertheless, it would be extremely
beneficial for haptic simulations to fully exploit and use
modern GPU-oriented physics-based approaches as it could
be the next quantum leap in the quality and realism of the
simulators.
Feedback in training
An important aspect is to provide learning feedback and
evaluation during training sessions. While most of the exist-
ing simulators provide visuo-haptic feedback, some of them
also provide a detailed feedback of the training session by
recording the number of clicks, motion of the haptic cur-
sor, applied forces in the environment, actions made by the
user, etc. The assessment of the tasks and user performance
is made via the registration of the interaction parameters
of the environment. For instance, some systems focus on
quantifying the number of operations carried out in a given
time interval, such as the system described in [42], where
the authors measured the number of calculus removed over
a period of ten minutes. Other systems analyzed parame-
ters and evaluation checklists from the users by checking
the reliability of the simulation [66, 70]. Nonetheless, these
results and checklists were measured internally, so no eval-
uation nor feedback was given to the user. Researches
have also considered increasing the adaptability of virtual
environments. Students can use different medical training
scenarios by modifying the parameters of the models in the
work of Delorme et al. [46].
Contrary to the closed systems that do not provide feed-
back to the user, simulators introduced in [36, 47, 53]
provided real-time feedback to the user. They send immedi-
ate messages on how the user is performing and they also
provide tips during the task. Additionally, Jiang et al. [47]
presented a system that includes an evaluation of the whole
task by displaying an appropriate assessment metrics.
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 19 of 22
104
Gaudina et al. [54] used an assessment method to eval-
uate the learning by measuring user performance. Their
simulator predicted the score obtained during the training
session and provided students with feedback that helped
them to know the aspects that needed to be improved.
VF has been used in the area as guidance during training
simulations; however, they are not properly considered as
learning feedback. VF are used to keep students out of pro-
hibited areas within the workspace. This type of assistance
was used by Hernansanz et al. [61]. Nonetheless, VF has
been shown to be generally ineffective in improving results
in training [78, 79]. Authors should consider using other
kinds of virtual assistance methods to attain better results
during training and avoid disturbances during user’s move-
ments, such as Temporally Separated Assistance or Spatially
Separated Assistance [80]. Another methodology that has
been used in virtual environments with haptic devices is col-
laborative learning. These environments are based on the
interaction between users or user-expert. These are prin-
cipally based in a token-based approach, where one user
cannot do anything until she has the token [37, 65]. How-
ever, these environments require large time from experts,
and they are not easily accessible for training simulators.
Several studies performed usability tests with students
and experts in the field of medicine [26, 29, 30, 32, 37,
42, 66, 70]. Most of the researchers ask the medical staff
to answer surveys and functionality questionnaires to assess
the simulation fidelity, and these evaluations helped virtual
environments with haptic devices to gain acceptance in the
medical community.
Even though the above-presented simulators allow
assessment of user performance in the virtual environment,
they do not usually provide assistance, guidance or hints
after simulation. It is important to decide whether it is better
to provide immediate ongoing feedback while interacting
with the simulation, or to provide users a post-feedback after
having interacted with the system. The use of expert human
tutors could help to train users appropriately. Indeed, these
systems have contributed in various areas in the training of
professionals [1].
Considerations
By analyzing the state of art of haptic simulators in medical
training, we identified several aspects that are important to
consider.
The target audience It is extremely important to actually
know the audience, the level of knowledge they hold, and
to make an ex ante decision about the targeted group before
the simulator is actually developed. The audience affects
the choice of the technology (DoF, DoFF, immersion, visual
realism) as well as appropriate learning feedback to be
provided.
The required level of visual realism varies significantly
for each area. While the high visual quality is important in
areas where the user can actually see the performed opera-
tion in daylight (dental, stitching) it may not be so important
in endo- and laparoscopy. However, a general tendency to
increase the realism and the quality of rendering is given by
the increasing quality of GPUs and modern APIs for com-
puter graphics, such as OpenGL and shading languages such
as GLSL.
Another challenge is the incorporation of medical tools
models in the virtual environment that promotes realism in
the simulations. Students tend to learn better if they have
training stations that provide simulator resources as the ones
they use on real life. On the other hand, modifications of
current haptic devices may be important to increase the
quality of haptic feedback, and they represent a lower cost
choice for situations when a large number of users need to
be trained. According to users and medical staff, differences
between the virtual procedure and the real one represent
a change in traditional operation habits, which generates a
difficulty in the procedures of surgical tasks. This aspect
involves the creation of simulators that add, adapt or modify
current haptic devices.
The feedback provided by current simulators is often the
most neglected part of the system. Future work should be
focused on providing in-depth feedback for the users, eval-
uating the learning of an individual user over time, and
including intelligent assistants or tutors that could allow stu-
dents to enhance dexterity and improve performance. These
modules should measure and guide them to perform the task
properly, providing an enhanced learning process.
In addition to the previous remarks, it is important to
mention that the development of adaptive simulators, capa-
ble of modifying the degree of difficulty of surgical pro-
cesses depending on the user performance, will be highly
suitable for training purposes. Indeed, these systems could
provide appropriate challenges aimed to improve suturing
skills acquisition. Also, this kind of simulators should pro-
vide modules in order to monitor the curve of expertise
reached by users and display new scenarios according to
their progress.
Moreover, there are also challenges that must be resolved
when researchers want to incorporate haptic devices in vir-
tual training environments. One of them is the calibration
of force feedback that is going to be sent to students when
they interact with the simulated tissues and organs. Proper
modeling of forces should be considered by applying proper
mathematical theorems and constrictions.
104
Page 20 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Finally, it is worth to mention that simulators should
benefit from the latest advances in GPU design and novel
algorithms for physically based modeling.
Conclusion
In this work, we have presented a survey of medical train-
ing simulators that use haptic feedback. Existing works
and simulators have been reviewed and compared from the
viewpoint of surgical techniques modeled, the number of
degrees of freedom and degrees of haptic feedback, per-
ceived realism, immersion, and learning feedback provided
to the user.
Visual and auditory channels have been privileged in the
evolution of the interaction between humans and computers.
Tactile sensations have been added gradually by develop-
ing devices intended for hands, such as mouse, keyboards
and touch screens, which are primarily used to input data.
Recent advances in the development of haptic devices allow
the perception of the environment through an active exami-
nation by the sense of touch, feeling, and palpating its shape
and texture. Training virtual environments that incorporate
haptic devices pose an important alternative to train and gain
hand-operated skills.
While haptic simulations are an interesting and low cost
alternative to training by using real tissues, they are still
hindered by the low realism of the visual environment or
the high price for high quality devices. Visual realism has
been driven by the entertainment industry, whereas haptic
feedback is usually developed in research laboratories.
One important aspect of the medical simulators is
the quality of the feedback provided to the user. Many
approaches limit themselves to only mimicking the real
world. However, simulators should have the capability to
log the entire session and provide detailed feedback that
could be coupled with the use of an expert evaluation
either in the form of human evaluation or an intelligent
tutor. This would certainly have the potential to increase
the usage of medical haptic training devices in medical
practices.
References
1. Vanlehn, K., The Behavior of Tutoring Systems. Int. J. Artif. Intell.
Educ. 16(3):227–265.
2. Gazibara, T., Marusic, V., Maric, G., Zaric, M., Vujcic, I.,
Kisic-Tepavcevic, D., Maksimovic, J., Maksimovic, N., Denic,
L.M., Grujicic, S.S., Pekmezovic, T., and Grgurevic, A., Intro-
ducing E-learning in Epidemiology Course for Undergradu-
ate Medical Students at the Faculty of Medicine, Univer-
sity of Belgrade: A Pilot Study. J. Med. Syst. 40(3):1–12,
2015.
3. Ito, M., Sugito, M., Kobayashi, A., Nishizawa, Y., Tsunoda,
Y., and Saito, N., Influence of learning curve on short-term
results after laparoscopic resection for rectal cancer. Surg. Endosc.
23(2):403–408, 2009.
4. Tseng, J.F., Pisters, P.W., Lee, J.E., Wang, H., G´omez, H.F., Sun,
C.C., and Evans, D.B., The learning curve in pancreatic surgery.
Surgery 141(4):456–463, 2007.
5. Vickers, A.J., Savage, C.J., Hruza, M., Tuerk, I., Koenig, P.,
Mart´ınez-Pi˜neiro, L., Janetschek, G., and Guillonneau, B., The
surgical learning curve for laparascopic compared to open rad-
ical prostatectomy: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Oncol.
10(5):475–480, 2009.
6. Lau, F., and Bates, J., A review of e-learning practices for
undergraduate medical education. J. Med. Syst. 28(1):71–87,
2004.
7. Juanes, J.A., and Ruisoto, P., Computer applications in health
science education. J. Med. Syst. 39(9):1–5, 2015.
8. Secin, F.P., Savage, C., Abbou, C., de La Taille, A., Salomon, L.,
Rassweiler, J., Hruza, M., Rozet, F., Cathelineau, X., Janetschek,
G., Nassar, F., Turk, I., Vanni, A.J., Gill, I.S., Koenig, P.,
Kaouk, J.H., Martinez Pineiro, L., Pansadoro, V., Emiliozzi, P.,
Bjartell, A., Jiborn, T., Eden, C., Richards, A.J., Van Velthoven,
R., Stolzenburg, J.-U., Rabenalt, R., Su, L.-M., Pavlovich, C.P.,
Levinson, A.W., Touijer, K.A., Vickers, A., and Guillonneau,
B., The learning curve for laparoscopic radical prostatectomy:
an international multicenter study. J. Urol. 184(6):2291–2296,
2010.
9. Coles, T.R., Meglan, D., and John, N.W., The Role of Haptics in
Medical Training Simulators : A Survey of the State of the Art.
IEEE Trans. Haptic 4(1):51–66, 2011.
10. Cotin, S., Delingette, H., and Ayache, N., Real-Time Elastic
Deformations of Soft Tissues for Surgery Simulation. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph. 5(1):62–73, 1999.
11. Brown, J., Sorkina, S., Latombea, J.-C., Montgomery, K., and
Stephanides, M., Algorithmic Tools for Real-Time Microsurgery
Simulation. Med. Image Anal. 6(3):289–300, 2002.
12. Immersion Medical, Medical Solutions, [accessed Oct-15-2014].
http://www.immersion.com/markets/medical/solutions/index.
html.
13. Mentice, About us, [accessed Oct-15-2014]. http://www.mentice.
com/about-us/.
14. ReachIn Technologies, About ReachIn Technologies, [accessed
Oct-15-2014]. http://www.reachin.se/companyinfo/.
15. Science, Surgical, About us, [accessed Oct-15-2014]. http://www.
surgical-science.com/surgical-science/about-us/.
16. Simbionix, GI Mentor, [accessed Jan-18-2016]. http://simbionix.
com/simulators/gi-mentor/.
17. CAE Healthcare, CAE Healthcare, [accessed Feb-15-2015]. http://
www.caehealthcare.com/eng/.
18. Basdogan, C., and Srinivasan, M.A., Haptic Rendering in Virtual
Environments. In: Handbook of Virtual Environments, 2002, pp.
117–134.
19. Massie, T.H., Design of a Three Degree of Freedom Force-
Reflecting Haptic Interface, Ph.D. thesis, 1993.
20. Van der Linde, R.Q., Lammertse, P., Frederiksen, E., and Ruiter,
B., The hapticmaster, a new high-performance haptic interface. In:
Proc. Euro-haptics (2002), pp. 1–5.
21. Basdogan, C., De, S., Kim, J., Muniyandi, M., Kim, H., and Srini-
vasan, M.A., Haptics in minimally invasive surgical simulation.
IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 24(2):56–64, 2004.
22. Marshall, P., Payandeh, S., and Dill, J., A study on haptic render-
ing in a simulated surgical training environment. In: 14th sympo-
sium on haptic interfaces for virtual environment and teleoperator
systems, 2006, pp. 241–247.
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
Page 21 of 22
104
23. Jia, S., and Pan, Z., A preliminary study of suture simulation in
virtual surgery. In: International conference on audio language and
image processing (ICALIP), 2010, pp. 1340–1345.
24. Brown, J., Latombe, J.-C., and Montgomery, K., Real-time knot-
tying simulation. Vis. Comput. 20(2-3):165–179, 2004.
25. Payandeh, S., and Shi, F., Interactive multi-modal suturing. Virtual
Reality 14(4):241–253, 2010.
26. Ricardez, E., Noguez, J., Neri, L., Munoz-Gomez, L., and
Escobar-Castillejos, D., SutureHap : A suture simulator with
haptic feedback. In: Workshop on virtual reality interaction and
physical simulation VRIPHYS, 2014, pp. 79–86.
27. Choi, K.-S., Chan, S.-H., and Pang, W.-M., Virtual suturing sim-
ulation based on commodity physics engine for medical learning.
J. Med. Syst. 36(3):1781–1793, 2012.
28. Salisbury, K., Conti, F., and Barbagli, F., Haptic rendering: intro-
ductory concepts. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 24(2):24–32, 2004.
29. Min, L., Faragasso, A., Konstantinova, J., Aminzadeh, V., Senevi-
ratne, L., Dasgupta, P., and Althoefer, K., A novel tumor localiza-
tion method using haptic palpation based on soft tissue probing
data. In: IEEE international conference on robotics and automa-
tion (ICRA), 2014, pp. 4188–4193.
30. Ullrich, S., and Kuhlen, T., Haptic palpation for medical simu-
lation in virtual environments. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.
18(4):617–625, 2012.
31. Coumans, E.: Bullet physics library, [accessed April-15-2015].
http://bulletphysics.org/wordpress/.
32. Coles, T., John, N., Gould, D., and Caldwell, D., Integrating hap-
tics with augmented reality in a femoral palpation and needle
insertion training simulation. IEEE Trans. Haptic 4(3):199–209,
2011.
33. Phantom Head Dental Ltd, Phantom Head, [accessed Oct-15-
2014]. http://www.phantomhead.com/.
34. Tse, B., Harwin, W., Barrow, A., Quinn, B., San Diego, J., and
Cox, M., Design and development of a haptic dental training
system - hapTEL. In: Vol. 6192 of Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence - Haptics: Generating and Perceiving Tangible Sensations,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 101–108, 2010.
35. Si, H., Tetgen, [accessed Oct-15-2014]. http://wias-berlin.de/
software/tetgen/.
36. Chen, X., Lin, Y., Wang, C., Shen, G., and Wang, X., A vir-
tual training system using a force feedback haptic device for
oral implantology. In: Transactions on edutainment VIII, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 232–240.
37. Kosuki, Y., Okada, Y., 3D visual component based development
system for medical training systems supporting haptic devices
and their collaborative environments. In: Sixth International Con-
ference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems
(CISIS), 2012, pp. 687–692.
38. Hui, Z., and Dang-xiao, W., Soft tissue simulation with biman-
ual force feedback. In: International conference on audio language
and image processing (ICALIP), 2010, pp. 903–907.
39. Yanng, B., Intelligent learning system based on HMM model,
2011 Intl. Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling
(KAM), 560–564, 2011.
40. Okada, Y., and Tanaka, Y., Intelligentbox: A constructive visual
software development system for interactive 3D graphic applica-
tions. In: Proceedings computer animation, 1995, pp. 114–125,
213.
41. Basdogan, C., Sedef, M., Harders, M., and Wesarg, S., VR-
based simulators for training in minimally invasive surgery. IEEE
Comput. Graph. Appl. 27(2):54–66, 2007.
42. Wang, D., Zhang, Y., Hou, J., Wang, Y., Lv, P., Chen, Y., and Zhao,
H., iDental: A haptic-based dental simulator and its preliminary
user evaluation. IEEE Trans. Haptic 5(4):332–343, 2012.
43. SensAble, Ghost SDK, [accessed April-10-2015]. http://www.
dentsable.com/support-ghost-sdk.htm.
44. Rodwin, M.A., Chang, H.J., Ozaeta, M.M., and Omar, R., Mal-
practice premiums in massachusetts, a high-risk state: 1975 to
2005. Health Aff. 27(3):835–844, 2008.
45. Stone, S., and Bernstein, M., Prospective error recording in
surgery: an analysis of 1108 elective neurosurgical cases. Neuro-
surgery 60(6):1075–1080, 2007.
46. Delorme, S., Laroche, D., DiRaddo, R., and Del Maestro,
R.F., NeuroTouch: a physics-based virtual simulator for cranial
microneurosurgery training. Neurosurgery 71:32–42, 2012.
47. Jiang, D., Hovdebo, J., Cabral, A., Mora, V., and Delorme, S.,
Endoscopic third ventriculostomy on a microneurosurgery simula-
tor. SIMULATION: Transactions of The Society for Modeling and
Simulation International 89(12):1442–1449, 2013.
48. Neubauer,
A.,
Wolfsberger,
S.,
Forster,
M.-T.,
Mroz,
L.,
Wegenkittl, R., and Buhler, K., Advanced virtual endoscopic pitu-
itary surgery. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 11(5):497–507,
2005.
49. Perez-Gutierrez, B., Martinez, D. M., Rojas, O.E., Endoscopic
endonasal haptic surgery simulator prototype: A rigid endoscope
model, 2010 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference (VR), 2010.
50. Bioingenium Research Group, Nukak3D, [accessed Oct-15-
2014]. http://nukak3d.sourceforge.net/index.php.
51. Punak, S., Kurenov, S., and Cance, W., Virtual interrupted sutur-
ing exercise with the Endo stitch suturing device. In: Advances in
visual computing, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 55–63.
52. Spillmann, J., and Teschner, M., CoRdE: Cosserat Rod elements
for the dynamic simulation of one-dimensional elastic objects. In:
Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on computer anima-
tion, 2007, pp. 1–10.
53. Park, C.H., Wilson, K.L., and Howard, A.M., Examining the
learning effects of a low-cost haptic-based virtual reality sim-
ulator on laparoscopic cholecystectomy. In: Proceedings of the
26th IEEE international symposium on computer-based medical
systems, 2013, pp. 233–238.
54. Gaudina, M., Zappi, V., Bellanti, E., and Vercelli, G., eLaparo4D:
A step towards a physical training space for virtual video laparo-
scopic surgery. In: IEEE seventh international conference on
complex, intelligent, and software intensive systems, 2013, pp.
611–616.
55. Unity Technologies, Unity - Game engine, tools, and multiplat-
form, [accessed Jan-18-2015]. https://unity3d.com/es/unity.
56. Blender Foundation, Blender, [accessed Oct-15-2014]. http://
www.blender.org/.
57. De Paolis, L.T., Serious game for laparoscopic suturing training.
In: IEEE sixth international conference on complex, intelligent,
and software intensive systems (CISIS), 2012, pp. 481–485.
58. Torus Knot Software Ltd, Ogre3D, [accessed Oct-15–2014].
http://www.ogre3d.org/.
59. Halic, T., and De, S., Lightweight bleeding and smoke effect
for surgical simulators. In: IEEE virtual reality conference (VR),
2010, pp. 271–272.
60. De, S., Ahn, W., Lee, D.Y., and Jones, D.B., Novel virtual lap-
band simulator could promote patient safety. In: Medicine meets
virtual reality 16, 2008, pp. 98–100.
61. Hernansanz, A., Zerbato, D., Gasperotti, L., Scandola, M., Fiorini,
P., and Casals, A., Improving the development of surgical skills
with virtual fixtures in simulation. In: Information processing
in computer-assisted interventions, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2012, pp. 157–166.
62. Rasmussen, J., and Member, S., Skills, Rules, and Knowledge;
Signals, Signs, and Symbols, and Other Distinctions in Human
Performance Models. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 13(3):257–
266, 1983.
104
Page 22 of 22
J Med Syst (2016) 40: 104
63. Zerbato, D., Baschirotto, D., Baschirotto, D., Botturi, D., and
Fiorini, P., GPU-based physical cut in interactive haptic simula-
tions. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 6(2):265–72, 2011.
64. Chen, Y., and He, X., Haptic simulation of bone drilling based on
hybrid 3d part representation. In: 2013 IEEE international confer-
ence on computational intelligence and virtual environments for
measurement systems and applications (CIVEMSA), 2013, pp.
78-81.
65. Cecil, J., Ramanathan, P., Rahneshin, V., Prakash, A., and Pirela-
Cruz, M., Collaborative virtual environments for orthopedic
surgery. In: IEEE international conference on automation science
and engineering (CASE), 2013, pp. 133-137.
66. Ni, D., Chan, W.-Y., Qin, J., Chui, Y.-P., Qu, I., Ho, S., and Heng,
P.-A., A virtual reality simulator for ultrasound-guided biopsy
training. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 31(2):36–48, 2011.
67. Selmi, S.-Y., Fiard, G., Promayon, E., Vadcard, L., and Troccaz,
J., A virtual reality simulator combining a learning environment
and clinical case database for image-guided prostate biopsy. In:
IEEE 26th international symposium on computer-based medical
systems (CBMS), 2013, pp. 179-184.
68. TIMC-IMAG laboratory, Computer Assisted Medical Intervention
Tool Kit, [accessed Jan-01-2016]. http://camitk.imag.fr/.
69. Yi, N., Xiao-jun, G., Xiao-ru, L., Xiang-feng, X., and Wanjun,
M., The implementation of haptic interaction in virtual surgery.
In: International conference on electrical and control engineering
(ICECE), 2010, pp. 2351-2354.
70. Wei, L., Najdovski, Z., Abdelrahman, W., Nahavandi, S., and
Weisinger, H., Augmented optometry training simulator with
multi-point haptics. In: IEEE international conference on systems,
man, and cybernetics (SMC), 2012, pp. 2991-2997.
71. Gamecho, B., Silva, H., Guerreiro, J., Gardeazabal, L., and
Abascal, J., A context-aware application to increase elderly
users
compliance
with
physical
rehabilitation
exercises
at
home via animatronic biofeedback. J. Med. Syst. 39(11):1–11,
2015.
72. Rajanna, V., Vo, P., Barth, J., Mjelde, M., Grey, T., Oduola, C.,
and Hammond, T., Kinohaptics: An automated, wearable, haptic
assisted, physio-therapeutic system for post-surgery rehabilitation
and self-care. J. Med. Syst. 40(3):1–12, 2015.
73. Heng, P.-A., Cheng, C.-Y., Wong, T.-T., Xu, Y., Chui, Y.-P., Chan,
K.-M., and Tso, S.-K., A virtual-reality training system for knee
arthroscopic surgery. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 8(2):217–
227, 2004.
74. Hirche, S., and Buss, M., Human-oriented control for haptic
teleoperation. Proc. IEEE 100(3):623–647, 2012.
75. NVIDIA, PhysX FAQ - NVIDIA, [accessed April-15-2015].
http://www.nvidia.com/object/physxfaq.html.
76. Havok, About Havok, [accessed April-15-2015]. http://www.
havok.com/about-havok/.
77. Newton dynamics, Newton Dynamics - About Newton, [accessed
April-15-2015]. http://newtondynamics.com/forum/newton.php.
78. Reinkensmeyer, D.J., How to retrain movement after neuro- logic
injury: a computational rationale for incorporating robot (or ther-
apist) assistance. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society Meeting 2:1479–1482, 2003.
79. Crespo, L. M., Reinkensmeyer, D.J., Effect of robotic guidance on
motor learning of a timing task, 2008.
80. Powell, D., and O’Malley, M.K., Efficacy of shared-control guid-
ance paradigms for robot-mediated training. In: IEEE world
haptics conference, pp. 427–432, 2011.
