Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cmpb 
A new model of soft tissue with constraints for interactive surgical 
simulation 
Wenguo Hou a , Peter X. Liu a , b , ∗, Minhua Zheng a , ∗, ∗
a School of Mechanical, Electronic and Control Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 10 0 044, PR China 
b Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 28 February 2019 
Revised 23 March 2019 
Accepted 27 March 2019 
Keywords: 
Brain tissue deformation model 
Interactive neurosurgical simulation 
Geometry constraint 
Optimization implicit Euler 
a b s t r a c t 
Background and objectives: An accurate and real-time model of soft tissue is critical for surgical simulation 
for which a user interacts haptically and visually with simulated patients. This paper focuses on the 
real-time deformation model of brain tissue for the interactive surgical simulation, such as neurosurgical 
simulation. 
Methods: A new Finite Element Method (FEM) based model with constraints is proposed for the brain 
tissue in neurosurgical simulation. A new energy function of constraints characterizing the interaction 
between the virtual instrument and the soft tissue is incorporated into the optimization problem derived 
from the implicit integration scheme. Distance and permanent deformation constraints are introduced to 
describe the interaction in the convexity meningioma dissection and hemostasis. The proposed model is 
particularly suitable for GPU-based computing, making it possible to achieve real-time performance. 
Results and conclusions: Simulation results show that the simulated soft tissue exhibits the behav- 
iors of adhesion and permanent deformation under the constraints. Experiments show that the proposed 
model is able to converge to the exact solution of the implicit Euler method after 96 iterations. The 
proposed model was implemented in the development of a neurosurgical simulator, in which surgical 
procedures such as dissection of convexity meningioma and hemostasis were simulated. 
© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
1. Introduction 
Neurosurgery is one of the most challenging, complex and tech- 
nically demanding surgical procedures. A long period of training 
practices are required to ensure that neurosurgical residents gain 
proﬁciency in microsurgical skills, such as ventriculostomy, tu- 
mor debulking, hemostasis and microdissection, which are vital for 
avoiding intraoperative risks [1–3] . Studies have demonstrated that 
surgical simulation systems play important roles in the acquisition 
of surgical skills, which enables young neurosurgical beginners to 
gain hands-on experiences through practising on risk-free environ- 
ments [4–7] . An interactive neurosurgical simulation system allows 
neurosurgical students to manipulate soft tissue models through 
virtual instruments, which produces complex physical phenomena 
such as elastic or plastic deformation, contact and adhesion [8–11] . 
One way to achieve accurately and real-time modeling of soft 
tissues is incorporating the FEM-based model using an optimiza- 
∗Corresponding author at: Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON 
K1S5B6, Canada. 
∗∗Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: xpliu@sce.carleton.ca (P.X. Liu), mhzheng@bjtu.edu.cn (M. 
Zheng). 
tion implicit Euler method [12,13] . A descent method can be used 
to solve the deformation model, which is suitable for GPU-based 
computing. Both anisotropic and viscoelastic properties of brain 
tissues can be incorporated into the deformation model. However, 
these models can only describe the dynamics of free deformable 
bodies subject to external gravity with optionally static nodes [14] . 
Interactions between brain tissues and rigid neurosurgical instru- 
ments, which take place during neurosurgical procedures, cannot 
be properly simulated by these models. 
The FEM model is one of the most commonly used physically 
based approaches to model soft tissues in the surgical simulation. 
Continuum constitutive equations are used to govern the elastic 
behaviors of the soft tissues, which can provide a high degree 
of mechanical realism [15] . Partial differential equations (PDEs) 
of the dynamic system derived from the FEM model are solved 
by integrating procedures. Several works have been proposed to 
incorporate the FEM deformation model into the development of 
a surgical simulator [16–19] . In [17] , Delorme et al. developed a 
physics-based virtual microneurosurgery simulator, in which the 
FEM model with an explicit time integration scheme is used to 
model the deformation of brain tissue. In [19] , an open-source 
ﬁnite element toolkit, NiftySim, is proposed for simulation of soft 
tissue biomechanics. Contacts between multiple biological tissues, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.03.018 
0169-2607/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
36 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
self-collisions and contacts between biological tissues and surgical 
instruments can be simulated in this toolkit. In [18] , an open- 
source C ++ library for interactive medical simulation is proposed, 
in which the internal mechanical behavior of biological tissues 
can be computed using the FEM model. Interactions between 
virtual objects, such as contact, collision response were handled 
by constraint solvers. While the FEM model provides the accurate 
description of the soft tissue deformation, low computational 
eﬃciency is the bottleneck in developing a surgical simulator 
which has the requirement of real-time performance. 
Position Based Dynamic (PBD) method is another commonly 
used approach to model soft tissues. Position changes are com- 
puted directly in each simulation time step. Overshooting problem 
of explicit integration schemes can be avoided in contrast with 
classical force based simulation approaches [20,21] . Continuous 
materials can be simulated by combining a continuum-based for- 
mulation with the position based method [21–23] . In [21] , a set of 
constraints for the strain energy are introduced into the position 
based method to model elastic behaviors of continuous materials. 
Complex physical effects such as lateral contraction, anisotropy 
and elastoplasticity of deformable objects can be simulated. In 
[22] , a set of constraints which forcing the entries of the Green - 
St. Venant strain tensor to zero are introduced into the PBD frame- 
work. Stretch and shear deformations of continuous materials can 
be controlled independent of the tessellation of the mesh. The 
anisotropic behavior can also be simulated by varying the stiffness 
values corresponding to the individual strain coeﬃcients. 
Controllability is the main advantage of the PBD method and 
various kinds of interactions such as collision, friction and vol- 
ume conservation can be handled easily with constraints, which 
makes it well-suited for interactive simulations. The position based 
method have become very popular in computer graphics because 
of its simplicity, controllability and robustness. Several works have 
been proposed to describe the elastic behaviors of soft tissues 
with a position based dynamic framework in surgical simulations 
[24,25] . In [26] , the position based method is used to model ob- 
jects collision, friction and volume conservation of soft tissues in 
an interactive dynamic simulation environment. In [27] , Sui et al. 
proposed a hybrid deformation model to simulate the mechanical 
behavior of biological tissues surrounding the rectum, which based 
on a multi-layer structure and a position based dynamic frame- 
work. Interactions between different objects can be easily handled 
through introducing new constraints [28] . However, these methods 
are generally not as accurate as physic-based methods but provide 
visual plausibility. 
Optimization implicit Euler method is another successful way 
of solving the PDEs of the dynamic system derived from the force- 
based deformation model. The dynamic system can be converted 
into an unconstrained nonlinear optimization problem [12,13,29–
33] . Various optimization strategies can be implemented, which 
can provided a high computational eﬃciency. In [29] , Liu et al. 
expressed the implicit Euler integration method as an energy min- 
imization problem and introduced an new energy potential func- 
tion of the spring mass system. A block coordinate descent method 
is used to solve the minimization problem, which converges to the 
exact solution of the implicit Euler method. In [30] , a projective 
implicit Euler solver was proposed to solve the optimization prob- 
lem, which build a bridge between the Finite Element method and 
the PBD method. In [31] , Gast et al. proposed to use a constrained 
minimization method to simulate the collision between virtual 
objects. In [12] , Wang et al. proposed a new gradient descent 
method with Jacobi preconditioning and Chebyshev acceleration to 
solve the nonlinear optimization problem derived from the implicit 
time integration scheme. In [13] , the optimization implicit Euler 
method was implemented into the development of a neurosurgical 
simulator, in which the mechanical properties of brain tissue such 
as anisotropy and viscoelasticity were incorporated into the defor- 
mation model. The descent method proposed in [12] is particularly 
suitable for GPU-based parallel computing, which make it possible 
to achieve real-time performance for computation-intensive neu- 
rosurgical simulation. While these methods are promising, they 
are still unable to simulate various interactions between multiple 
soft tissues and instruments properly. 
In this paper, we introduce a new soft tissue deformation 
model with constraints for neurosurgical simulation. Speciﬁcally, a 
new energy function of constraint is introduced into the optimiza- 
tion problem derived from the implicit Euler integration scheme; 
distance and permanent deformation constraints are introduced 
to characterize the interactions in the convexity meningioma 
dissection and hemostasis. The descent method is used to solve 
the optimization problem, which provides high computational 
eﬃciency. Examples are presented to assess the performance of 
the developed deformation model. Simulation results show that 
the interactions such as adhesion and permanent deformation can 
be properly simulated by the presented deformation model. In 
the meantime, the GPU-based implementation of the developed 
deformation model improves computational eﬃciency signiﬁcantly 
over CPU-based FEM models with the implicit integration scheme. 
The developed model was incorporated into the development 
of a neurosurgical simulator, in which neurosurgical procedures 
such as dissection of convexity meningioma and hemostasis were 
simulated. The simulator provides a relatively high degree of visual 
realism with a visual refreshment rate of 31.1 frames per second on 
a regular PC. 
The novelty of this work exists in at least two aspects: (1) A 
new energy function of constraints is introduced into the optimiza- 
tion problem, which characterizes well the interactions between 
surgical instruments and soft tissues; (2) Both distance and per- 
manent deformation constraint functions are integrated into the 
model of soft tissue, making it particularly useful to model the be- 
haviors of connections between different types of soft tissues dur- 
ing the surgical process. The results are very important for the sim- 
ulation of neurosurgical procedures, such as hemostasis and tumor 
dissection. 
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 , 
the FEM-based model using the optimization implicit Euler method 
is brieﬂy explained. In Section 3 , we show how the new energy 
function of constraint is introduced into the deformation model. 
Implementation and simulation results are provided in Section 4 . 
A brief discussion is presented in Section 5 . Conclusion and future 
work are given in Section 6 . 
2. Background 
In the FEM-based deformation model, the deformation of soft 
tissue can be formulated as a function φ : R 3 → R 3 , which maps 
an undeformed conﬁguration into a deformed conﬁguration. The 
Linear Tetrahedron (LT) technique is often used to discrete the de- 
formable object into a number of ﬁnite elements. When the soft 
tissue undergoes deformation, a strain energy function W is used 
to characterize the stress-strain relationship of the soft object. In 
each tetrahedron mesh T i , the elastic forces associated with each 
individual mesh vertex are the negative gradient of the strain en- 
ergy function with respect to the corresponding degree of freedom, 
which can be written as 
f i 

x j 

= −∂W i 
∂ −→ 
x j 
(1) 
where f i ( x j ) is the forces applied on vertex j which is contributed 
by its immediate neighbor element T i . 
For the FEM-based deformation model, implementation of the 
implicit time integration scheme results in a large system of non- 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
37 
linear equations, which can be converted into a nonlinear op- 
timization problem [12,13] . Consider the tetrahedron mesh con- 
sisting of N vertices with position vector x = ( −→ 
x 1 , −→ 
x 2 , . . . , −→ 
x N ) T , 
and let v = ( −→ 
v 1 , −→ 
v 2 , . . . , −→ 
v N ) T be the velocity vector of the mesh 
vertices. The dynamic system derived from the FEM-based model 
evolves in time according to the Newton’s laws of motion through 
a discrete set of time samples. The deformation of soft tissue from 
time step t to t + 1 can be calculated through an implicit time in- 
tegration scheme, as: 
x t+1 = x t + h v t+1 
v t+1 = v t + h M −1 f ( x t+1 ) 
(2) 
where h is the simulation time step size, M ∈ R 3 N×3 N is the mass 
matrix of mesh vertices, f ∈ R 3 N is the elastic forces applied on 
each mesh vertices. By combing the two equations, we derive a 
single nonlinear system: 
M ( x t+1 −x t −h v t ) = h 2 f ( x t+1 ) 
(3) 
Since the elastic forces are the negative gradient of the strain 
energy as f ( x ) = −∂ W ( x ) /∂ x , where W ( x ) is the total poten- 
tial energy evaluated at x , the nonlinear dynamic system can be 
converted into an unconstrained nonlinear optimization problem: 
x t+1 = arg min ϵ( x ) 
ϵ( x ) = 1 
2 h 2 ( x −s t ) T M ( x −s t ) + W ( x ) 
(4) 
where s t = x t + h v t , which is related to the state of the discretized 
model at time t . 
Several kinds of solvers have been proposed to solve the non- 
linear optimization problem. In the PBD method, a Gauss–Seidel- 
like solver is used to minimize the object function ϵ( x ). However, 
the inertial term ( x −s t ) T M ( x −s t ) is not taken into account. A 
local/global solver is proposed to reduce specially designed energy 
potentials in the Projective Dynamic Method [30] . Another method 
to solve the optimization problem is the descent method [12,13] , 
of which the key question is how to ﬁnd an effective descent di- 
rection with low computational cost. Iterative procedures are per- 
formed in the descent method to minimize the object function 
ϵ( x ). 
The descent method used in our proposed deformation model 
is shown in Algorithm 1 . At time step t + 1 , the vertex position 
Algorithm 1 Deformation algorithm of proposed soft tissue defor- 
mation model. 
Input: Geometric model of soft tissue 
Output: Position of each vertex 
1: Initialize x (0) 
2: for l = 0 to L −1 do 
3: 
Calculate the gradient and Hessian matrix of ϵ( x ) at x (l) 
4: 
Get descent direction: 
x (l) = −diag −1 ( H (l) ) ∇ϵ( x (l) ) 
5: 
Adjust the step length α(l) 
6: 
Update vertex position: x (l+1) ← x (l) + α(l) x (l) 
7: end for 
8: Obtain the new position of each vertices 
x t+1 is calculated by solving the optimization problem described 
in Eq. (4) . The descent method contains four steps. Step 1, the ini- 
tial vertex position x (0) is predicted through an explicit integration 
scheme x (0) = x t + h v t , which help reduce the object function ϵ( x ) 
to a low level, as shown in line (1). Step 2, the descent direction 
at iteration step l is calculated. The estimate x ( l ) is already known. 
In line (3), the gradient and Hessian matrix of the object function 
ϵ( x ) are evaluated at x ( l ) . In line (4), a new descent direction is 
deﬁned as: 
x (l) = −diag −1 
H (l) ∇ϵ
x (l) 
(5) 
where H ( l ) is the Hessian matrix of ϵ( x ( l ) ). Step 3, given the descent 
direction x ( l ) , the step length α( l ) is gradually reduced until sat- 
isﬁed the ﬁrst Wolfe condition [12] : 
ϵ
x (l) + α(l) x (l) 
< ϵ
x (l) 
+ c (l) α(l) x (l) · ∇ϵ
x (l) 
(6) 
in which c is a control parameter. Step 4, the estimate of the ver- 
tex position x (l+1) is updated, as shown in line (6). Step 2 - Step 4 
are iteratively performed, which could help to reduce the objec- 
tive function ϵ( x ) to minim. Finally, the new vertex position x t+1 
at time step t + 1 can be obtained after 96 iterations. 
The descent method achieves accurate and eﬃcient description 
of the soft tissue deformation, which meets the basic requirements 
of the surgical simulation. However, there are lots of interactive sit- 
uation in the interactive neurosurgical simulation, such as adhesion 
of multi soft tissues, cutting, suction and permanent deformation, 
which cannot be properly simulated. 
3. A new brain tissue deformation model with constraints 
So far we have described the dynamics of a free deformation 
body subject to external gravity with optionally static nodes. Soft 
tissues can deform under the manipulation such as traction in the 
virtual environment, which satisﬁes the basic requirements of sur- 
gical simulation. However, a neurosurgical simulator is supposed to 
help neurosurgeons practice various kinds of surgical procedures 
which contains different kinds of interactions between soft tis- 
sues and instruments. For example, dissection of convexity menin- 
giomas is one of the classic situation for neurosurgical training 
exercise, where the meningiomas adheres to the surface of brain 
tissue. Hemostasis is another essential technique in the neuro- 
surgery that demands neurosurgeons to use bipolar forceps to con- 
trol blood loss, which would cause permanent deformation of soft 
tissues. Neurosurgical simulation is performed in a highly interac- 
tive environment where the free body equations of motion can be 
transiently changed [14] . Interactions and the phenomenon they 
produced should be properly simulated, which help to improve 
training outcomes by providing realistic visual feedback. 
In FEM-based method and PBD method, interactions between 
virtual objects are usually treated as constraints [28] . The posi- 
tion based method can be interpreted as descent method under 
a nonlinear optimization framework derived from implicit integra- 
tion scheme [30] . Inspired by that, the constraint function in PBD 
method is adopted into the optimization implicit method. In this 
paper, a constraint function, which characterizes the interactions 
between virtual objects, is introduced into the optimization im- 
plicit method. The proposed deformation model can provide a high 
realistic description of soft tissue deformation in an interactive en- 
vironment. 
When 
there 
are 
interactions 
between 
virtual 
objects, 
they can be formulated as a set of constraints C ( x ) = 
[ C 1 ( x ) , C 2 ( x ) , . . . , C m ( x )] T . The key to our proposed deforma- 
tion method is to introduce a new extra constraint term into the 
optimization problem. In order to incorporate the constraints into 
the optimization problem, we deﬁne a new energy potential U ( x ) 
as function of constraints. Inspired by Macklin et al. [34] , the new 
energy potential can be formulated as 
U( x ) = 1 
2 C ( x ) T γC ( x ) 
(7) 
where γ is a block diagonal matrix. The entries of matrix γ repre- 
sent the stiffness of each constraint in the dynamic system derived 
from the FEM-based model. Given the potential energy function 
of interaction constraints, the equivalent constraint forces, which 
press the deformation model such that it is displaced and reaches 
a new rest state, can be written as the negative gradient of U ( x ) 
with respect to x , 
f C = −∇ x U T = −∇ C T γC 
(8) 
38 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
When new constraints are applied on the deformation model, the 
equivalent constraints forces are added into the nonlinear dynamic 
system described in (3) , as 
M ( x t+1 −x t −h v t ) = h 2 f ( x t+1 ) + h 2 f C ( x t+1 ) 
(9) 
The nonlinear dynamic system with extra constraint forces can also 
be converted into a new nonlinear optimization problem: x t+1 = 
arg min ϵ( x ) 
ϵC ( x ) = 1 
2 h 2 ( x −s t ) T M ( x −s t ) + W ( x ) + U( x ) 
(10) 
where s t = x t + h v t , U ( x ) is the energy potential of constraints. 
In the simulation of soft tissue, nonlinear Eq. (9) are used to 
govern the dynamics of the deformable object. Elastic forces 
which applied on each vertices make the deformation model 
maintain dynamic equilibrium. As the constraint is introduced 
into the deformation model, the constraints forces will compel the 
deformable objects rest into a desired state. 
In our proposed deformation model, the descent method 
is used to solve the optimization problem as described in 
Algorithm 1 . At the beginning of each time step t + 1 , an initial 
estimate of x (0) is predicted through performing an explicit time 
integration step. In each iteration step l , the descent direction at 
x ( l ) is calculated as 
x (l) = −diag −1 
H (l) 
C 
∇ϵC 

x (l) 
(11) 
where H (l) 
C is the Hessian matrix of ϵC ( x ( l ) ). A suitable step length 
α( l ) is adopted which satisﬁes the simpliﬁed ﬁrst Wolfe condition, 
as 
ϵC 

x (l) + α(l) x (l) 
< ϵC 

x (l) 
(12) 
in which the control parameter c is set to zero. Finally, the vertices 
move to the new estimated position along the descent direction 
x (l+1) = x (l) + α(l) x (l) . After L times of iterations, the ﬁnal solu- 
tion of the optimization problem is obtained, which is the new 
vertex position x t+1 at time step t + 1 . 
The energy function of constraint, which characterizes the in- 
teractions between virtual objects in the interactive neurosurgical 
simulation, is incorporated into the optimization implicit method. 
For different kinds of interactions in the neurosurgical simulation, 
the constraints can be incorporated in the same way. In this paper, 
energy functions of constraint, including distance and permanent 
deformation constraints, are introduced. 
3.1. Distance constraint 
Dissection of convexity meningioma is one of the classical 
situations for neurosurgical training exercise, in which the brain 
tumor adheres to the surface of brain tissue. When neurosurgeon 
performs microdissection, the tumor is retracted with forceps to 
expose the tumor–brain interface. Neurosurgical instruments, such 
as microscissors, are often used to separate the brain tissue and 
the tumor. Simulation of convexity meningioma dissection could 
help young neurosurgeons to gain proﬁciency in microsurgical 
skills, which requires proper simulation of the adhesions between 
the brain and the meningioma as well as the separation process. 
In this paper, we proposed a distance constraint to characterize 
the adhesion between the brain tissue and the tumor. When the 
tumor adheres to the brain, the distance between surfaces of brain 
and tumor keeps constant. In the deformation model, the initial 
distance between each pair of two attached vertices −→ 
x q 1 and −→ 
x q 2 
is d q . The distance constraint can be deﬁned as 
C q ( x ) = || −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || −d q 
(13) 
Given the distance constraint of each pair of attached vertices in 
the deformation model, we formulate the energy function of con- 
straint as 
U( x ) = 1 
2 C ( x ) T γC ( x ) 
= 1 
2 
m 
 
q =1 
k q 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || −d q 
2 
(14) 
where γ = diag(k 1 , k 2 , . . . , k m ) . In the energy function of distance 
constraint, k q represents the stiffness of each distance constraint. 
The energy function of distance constraint is incorporated into 
the optimization problem (10) . When solving the optimization 
problem in each time step, the descent direction in each iteration 
can be calculated as 
x (l) = −diag −1 H (l) 
C ∇ϵC 

x (l) 
= −diag −1 
H (l) + ∇ 2 U 
x (l) ∇ ϵ
x (l) 
+ ∇ U 
x (l) 
(15) 
where ∇ϵ( x ( l ) ) is the gradient of total energy potential ϵ( x ) with- 
out considering constraints evaluated at x ( l ) and H ( l ) is its Hessian 
matrix. The gradient of distance energy potential in (15) is calcu- 
lated as 
∇U( x ) = ∇ C T γC 
(16) 
in which 
∂C q ( x ) 
∂ −→ 
x q 1 
= 
−→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || 
∂C q ( x ) 
∂ −→ 
x q 2 
= 
−→ 
x q 2 −−→ 
x q 1 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || 
(17) 
In (15) , ∇ 2 U ( x ) is the Hessian matrix of energy function of distance 
constraint, which can be written as 
∇ 2 U( x ) = ∇ 2 C T γC + ∇ C T γ∇ C 
(18) 
where 
∂ 2 C q ( x ) 
∂ −→ 
x q 1 ∂ −→ 
x q 1 
= 
I 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || 
−
−→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 
−→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 
T 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || 3 
∂ 2 C q ( x ) 
∂ −→ 
x q 2 ∂ −→ 
x q 2 
= 
I 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || 
+ 
−→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 
−→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 
T 
|| −→ 
x q 1 −−→ 
x q 2 || 3 
When deformable objects adhere with each other, a set of at- 
tached vertex pairs can be identiﬁed. Distance constraints are im- 
posed in order to keep the distance between each pair of ver- 
tices constant. When the deformable objects is separated with each 
other by the neurosurgical instruments, the constraints imposed on 
the vertex pair are removed respectively. 
3.2. Permanent deformation constraint 
Hemostasis is one the most important technical skills that must 
be mastered by neurosurgeons. Bipolar forceps are usually used to 
cauterize blood vessels to complete coagulation. The heat gener- 
ated by bipolar forceps results to permanent deformation of brain 
tissue. Simulation of permanent deformation with the optimization 
implicit method can help to provide more realistic visual feedback 
in virtual neurosurgical training. 
In this paper, we proposed a new permanent deformation 
constraint function to characterize the permanent deformation of 
brain tissue during the hemostasis procedure. When the brain tis- 
sue deforms from its reference conﬁguration, the strain energy of 
deformed object can be written as W (q ) = ( E (q )) . From geomet- 
ric point of view, ( E (q )) = 0 represents the undeformed conﬁgu- 
ration of the deformation model, of which the strain tensor E ( q ) 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
39 
Fig. 1. Permanent deformation of the tetrahedron mesh. N c is the contact normal. 
N f is the surface normal of tetrahedron mesh. 
equals to zero. The Green - St. Venant strain tensor of the de- 
formed object is deﬁned as 
E = 1 
2 

F T F −I 
(19) 
The diagonal entries of E ij represent stretch and the off-diagonal 
entries E ij = E ji shear both with respect the main axes in the ma- 
terial frame [22] . The stretch constraints are incorporated into the 
deformation model 
C p ( x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , x 4 ) = S ii −s i 
(20) 
in which S = F T F and s i is the shrink ratio in each direction. From 
a geometric point of view, these three constraints would force the 
virtual object deform to the shrunk shape that the Green - St. 
Venant strain tensor goes back to the desired state. 
The energy potential of permanent deformation constraint can 
be written as 
U( x ) = 1 
2 C ( x ) T γC ( x ) 
(21) 
in which γ can be set as I . When solving the optimization problem 
(10) , the descent direction in each iteration can be calculated as 
x (l) = −diag −1 H (l) ∇ϵC 

x (l) 
= −diag −1 H (l) ∇ ϵ
x (l) 
+ ∇ U 
x (l) 
(22) 
where ∇ϵ( x ( l ) ) is the gradient of total energy potential ϵ( x ) with- 
out considering constraints evaluated at x ( l ) and H ( l ) is its Hessian 
matrix. The gradient of energy function of permanent deformation 
constraint is calculated as 
∇U( x ) = ∇ C T γC 
(23) 
in which 
∇ C ii = ∇ ( S ii −s i ) = 2 f i c T 
i 
(24) 
where F = [ f 1 , f 2 , f 3 ] is the deformation gradient, and D −1 
m = 
[ c 1 , c 2 , c 3 ] is the reference shape matrix. 
When the surgical instruments contact with brain tissue which 
cause permanent deformation, the tissues surrounding the contact 
point should shrink perpendicular to the contact surface. As shown 
in Fig. 1 , the contact normal N c passes through the contact point 
of surgical instrument and the center of the tetrahedron mesh in 
brain tissue model. In order to calculate the shrink ratio in the 
world coordinate, a new local coordinate system is established. 
The direction of N c is set as one axis of the local coordinate sys- 
tem. The other two axis ( N a , N b ) are generated through the face 
normal ( N f ) of the brain tissue, as N a = N f × N c and N b = N c × N a . 
The shrink ratio s l in world coordinate system can be calculated as 
 s x 
0 
0 
0 
s y 
0 
0 
0 
s z 
 
= R −1 
 σx 
0 
0 
0 
σy 
0 
0 
0 
σz 
 
R 
(25) 
where σ x , σ y and σ z are the shrink ratio in local coordinate sys- 
tem and R is the rotation matrix which transforms the initial nor- 
mal strain direction to the local coordinate system of the contact 
point. 
4. Simulation results 
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness and validity of the 
proposed deformation model, tests on three-dimensional geomet- 
ric models are performed. Various kinds of hyperelastic material 
models [35] that describe the elastic behavior of brain tissue can 
be implemented in our proposed deformation model. In our tests, 
the incompressible Mooney–Rivlin model is used to predict the de- 
formation of brain tissue. Constraints of distance and permanent 
deformation are incorporated into the examples respectively. The 
proposed model is implemented with GPU using descent method 
as describe in Algorithm 1 . The deformation model is incorporated 
into the development of a neurosurgical simulator. 
4.1. Simulation of distance constraint 
Two examples of the proposed deformation model with dis- 
tance constraint are presented. In the ﬁrst example, the cube 
model contains 882 vertices and 2880 tetrahedrons. The top of the 
cube model is attached on a ﬁxed plane. Distance constraints are 
imposed on the attached vertices of the two cubes. In the sec- 
ond example, a liver model, which contains 2578 vertices and 8837 
tetrahedrons, is presented. A gallbladder is attached on the surface 
of the liver. External manipulations are imposed on the models, as 
shown in Figs. 2 and 3 . 
In the ﬁrst example, the initial state of the cube model is shown 
in Fig. 2 (a). Distance constraints are imposed, as indicated with 
white lines. The initial distance d i between each pair of attached 
vertices is 2 mm. External displacement are imposed on the bot- 
tom edge of the cube model, as shown in Fig. 2 (b) and c. When the 
external traction is released, the cube model goes back to its rest 
state under the effect of gravity, as shown in Fig. 2 (d). The second 
example is shown in Fig. 3 . When the liver model is manipulated 
by a virtual instrument, the gallbladder keeps attached on the sur- 
face of the liver under the effect of distance constraints. 
Simulation results show that the distance constraints keep the 
vertex pairs remain attached when external manipulation is per- 
formed on the virtual objects. It provides a way to describe the 
attachment of soft tissues in the surgical simulation. The distance 
constraint has been incorporated into the development of a neuro- 
surgical simulator. 
4.2. Simulation of permanent deformation constraint 
An example of a cube model of edge length 0.05 m with perma- 
nent deformation constraint is presented. The cubic deformation 
model contains 10,648 vertex and 46,305 tetrahedrons. Vertices in 
the bottom of the cube model are ﬁxed. An inﬂuence area parame- 
ter ξ is used to determine which tetrahedron mesh the permanent 
deformation constraint is imposed on. When a virtual surgical in- 
strument contacts with the cube model, permanent deformation 
constraints are imposed on the tetrahedron meshes of which the 
distance from the contact point is closer than ξ. In this example, 
the inﬂuence area parameter ξ is set to 7.5 mm. Process of the per- 
manent deformation as well as the elastic deformation of the cube 
model are shown in Fig. 4 . 
The initial state of undeformed cube model is shown in 
Fig. 4 (a). When the hemostasis procedure is performed in neu- 
rosurgery, the bipolar forceps is used to cauterize the brain tis- 
sue, which cause permanent deformation of the brain tissue. As 
shown in Fig. 4 (b) and (c), the virtual surgical instrument contacts 
40 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
Fig. 2. Deformation of cube models with distance constraint: (a) shows the undeformed models, (b)–(d) show the deformation of cube models under external manipulation. 
Fig. 3. Deformation of a liver model with distance constraint: (a) shows the undeformed liver model, (b) and (c) show the deformation of liver model under external 
manipulation. 
Fig. 4. Deformation of a cube model with permanent deformation constraint: (a) shows the undeformed brain tissue, (b)–(d) show the deformation of brain tissue under 
the effect of permanent constraint. 
with the cube model. The contact point is selected as the mesh 
vertex of the virtual surgical instrument, which interacts with the 
surface of the cubic model. Tetrahedron meshes in the inﬂuence 
area are identiﬁed by the distance criterion. The permanent defor- 
mation constraints are imposed into the tetrahedrons in the inﬂu- 
ence area. The equivalent permanent deformation constraint forces 
presses the cube model such that it is displaced and reaches a new 
rest state. The shrink ratio of each tetrahedron mesh is calculated 
as described in Section 3.2 . The contact normal ( N c ) can be calcu- 
lated through the contact point and the center of the tetrahedron 
mesh. The face normal N f of the cube model is calculated through 
the coordinate of the triangle mesh in each time step. Then the 
local coordinate system of contact point is created and the shrink 
ratio s l is calculated respectively. The shrink ratio σ in local co- 
ordinate system is 0.2. As shown in Fig. 4 (d), external traction is 
imposed on the cube model and the distortion caused by cauteri- 
zation keeps permanent. 
4.3. Computational performance assessment 
In order to assess the performance of our proposed deformation 
model, the computation time of a single time step is measured. 
As described in Algorithm 1 , the descent method with GPU-base 
implementation is used to solve the optimization problem in our 
proposed deformation model. In each time step, the vertex posi- 
tion x (0) is initialed with an explicit time integration. The descent 
direction is calculated and the vertex position is updated along the 
descent direction in every iteration as descried in Section 3 . All of 
the tests use t = 1 / 30 s as the time step and run 96 iterations per 
time step. The tests ran on an personal computer with an Intel(R) 
Core E5-2650 v4 CPU, 32GB RAM and a NVIDIA GeForce GTX TITAN 
Xp graphics card with 3840 cores. 
The solution time of our proposed deformation is provide in 
Table 1 . Simulation results show that our proposed deformation 
model with constraints achieves high computational eﬃciency. 
Compared with FEM-based deformation model using implicit in- 
tegration scheme, our model is compatible to GPU-based compu- 
tation, makes it suitable for computation-intensive neurosurgical 
simulation. The energy function of constraint incorporated into our 
proposed deformation model costs few computational resources in 
each time step. After the constraints are removed, they don’t in- 
volve in the computation any more. In general, a visual refresh- 
ment rate of 30 Hz can meet the requirement of real-time perfor- 
mance in virtual surgical simulation. A refreshment of 31.1 frames 
per second can be achieved in our developed neurosurgical simu- 
lator. 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
41 
Table 1 
Solution time of the deformation model. 
Method 
Number of tetrahedron 
Constraints number 
Execution time (ms) 
Our model 
2880 
0 
20.47 
13,169 
0 
31.46 
Our model 
2880 
49 
20.82 
13,169 
475 
32.12 
CPU-based model 
2880 
0 
48.60 
13,169 
0 
249.74 
Fig. 5. The relative error of the deformation model in each iteration step. The 
descent method with hyperelastic material model is used in model 1. The de- 
scent method with anisotropy and viscoelasticity is used in model 2. In our de- 
formation model, the constraints are incorporated. The relative error is deﬁned as 
(ϵ( x (l) ) −ϵ( x ∗)) / (ϵ( x (0) ) −ϵ( x (∗) )) , where x ( l ) is the result in the lth iteration and 
x ∗is the ground truth calculated by Vega [36] . 
The solution of our developed deformation model can converge 
to the exact result of the implicit Euler integration method given 
suﬃcient number of iterations. In order to verify the accuracy of 
the developed model, the relative error in each iteration step is 
calculated. The relative errors of our developed deformation and 
the descent method without considering constraint are shown in 
Fig. 5 . Simulation results show that the solution of our developed 
can converge as fast as the descent method without considering 
constraint. In our developed method, 96 iterations are performed 
to get the ﬁnal solution of the vertex position in each time step. 
4.4. Simulation of neurosurgery 
The deformation model proposed in this paper is incorporated 
into the development of a neurosurgical simulator. Similar to [13] , 
the FEM-based model with optimization implicit method is used 
to simulate the deformation of brain tissue. Anisotropic and vis- 
coelastic properties of the brain tissue are incorporated into the 
deformation model. In this paper, constraints of distance and per- 
manent deformation are incorporated into the deformation model. 
Neurosurgical procedures such as microdissection and hemostasis 
are simulated, which can help young neurosurgeons to gain sur- 
gical experience through practising with the neurosurgical simula- 
tor. The Mimics, which is a software for image processing, three- 
dimensional designing and modeling, is used to reconstruct the 
geometric models of brain and meningioma through CT images 
of patients. The three-dimensional geometric model is converted 
into tetrahedral elements with TetGen, which is a mesh genera- 
tor developed by Si [37] . As the tumor adheres to the brain tissue, 
the pairs of attached vertices in the geometric models are selected 
manually. 
As shown in Fig. 6 , the simulation of microdissection of a 
meningioma is presented. There are 2179 nodes and 7461 tetra- 
hedral elements in the brain tissue model, and 1773 nodes and 
5708 tetrahedral elements in the meningioma model. The convex- 
ity meningioma is attached on the surface of the brain tissue. Dis- 
tance constraints are incorporated into 475 pairs of attached ver- 
tices, and the initial distance d i is set to 1 mm. In the beginning 
of meningioma dissection, the tumor is retracted by a gasper to 
expose the tumor-brain interface. The scalpel is used to separate 
the tumor from the brain tissue through cutting the arachnoid 
bands within the tumor-brain interface. Distance constraints that 
imposed on the attached vertex pairs are removed step by step, as 
shown in Fig. 6 (b) and (c). Finally, the tumor model is separated 
from the brain tissue model. 
After the meningioma is removed, bipolar is usually used to 
perform hemostasis. Simulation of the hemostasis procedure is 
shown in Fig. 7 . The bleeding site is identiﬁed ﬁrstly. Then the 
bipolar forceps is gently applied over the bleeding site and the 
heat generated by the bipolar forceps results to cauterization of 
bleed vessel, which leads to permanent deformation of brain tis- 
sue because of high temperature. As shown in Fig. 7 (b), a virtual 
surgical instrument is used to cauterize the bleed vessel as well 
as the brain tissue. Collision detection between the virtual surgical 
instrument and the brain tissue is performed. The contact point is 
identiﬁed when the virtual surgical instrument touches the brain 
tissue. The permanent deformation is imposed on the brain tissue 
model. The simulation results of hemostasis is shown in Fig. 7 (d). 
Several simulators for neurosurgery training have be proposed 
[17,38] . NeuroTouch is a physics-based virtual simulator which pro- 
vides a number of training tasks such as tumor-debulking, tu- 
mor cauterization, endoscopic nasal navigation and microdissec- 
tion. Compared with those simulators using FEM model and im- 
plicit integration scheme, the neurosurgical simulator developed 
using our proposed deformation model achieves a higher com- 
putational eﬃciency. The neurosurgical simulator we developed is 
shown in Fig. 8 . We integrated the simulated surgical scenes with 
real surgical ones, making it more realistic. The 3–D scene of the 
brain tissue can be observed on a 3-D monitor inside the cabinet. 
Two Phantom Omni desktop interfaces are used as the haptic con- 
trol consoles and a CHAI3D open source software package is em- 
ployed to drive the haptic interface. 
5. Discussion 
The simulation of constraints with an energy function in the 
proposed model is analogous to the penalty method [39] . As 
shown in equation (9) , penalty forces are incorporated into the dy- 
namic system of soft tissue. The penalty forces compete with all 
other forces applied on the vertices, which makes the dynamic sys- 
tem to be conformed by the constraints. When the constraints are 
violated, the penalty forces will pull the vertex back to its desired 
state. 
However, the conventional penalty method [39] suffers the in- 
stability problem when the restoring force is large. On the other 
hand, the restoring force needs to be large enough in order to 
overpower all other competing forces. This instability problem is 
well avoided in our proposed model since the implicit integra- 
tion scheme used is unconditionally stable. Moreover, the proposed 
42 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
Fig. 6. Simulation of neurosurgical procedures base on augmented reality: dissection of convexity meningioma. 
Fig. 7. Simulation of neurosurgical procedures base on augmented reality: hemostasis. 
Fig. 8. The virtual-reality based neurosurgical simulator we developed. 
model is relatively easy to implement and computationally eﬃ- 
cient, making it suitable for simulating neurosurgical procedures 
such as the dissection of convexity meningioma and hemostasis. 
The simulation of constraints with an energy function, however, 
may have the same drawback as the penalty method does [21] . 
Note that the parameter γ represents the stiffness of constraints 
and the restoring force applied on each vertex contains one or 
more stiffness parameters. It is diﬃcult to tune stiffness parame- 
ters in a complex system with many competing forces. The penalty 
forces introduced into the dynamic system can also lead to unde- 
sired oscillations. To solve this problem, the method of Lagrange 
multipliers [40] can be used to calculate these parameters explic- 
itly. 
6. Conclusion 
This paper presents a new brain tissue deformation model with 
constraints for neurosurgical simulation. The deformation model 
is based on the FEM model using the optimization implicit Euler 
method. An energy function of constraint that characterizes the 
interactions between the virtual instrument and soft tissue is in- 
corporated into the deformation model. Distance and permanent 
deformation constraints are proposed to characterize the interac- 
tions in the convexity meningioma dissection and hemostasis. The 
proposed deformation model has been incorporated into the devel- 
opment of a neurosurgical simulator. The simulation results show 
that the proposed deformation model provides a high degree of 
visual realism and computational eﬃciency. While the proposed 
method is focused on the simulation of neurosurgical procedures, 
it can be well extended to other surgical procedures, such as la- 
paroscopic surgery. 
There are still a few types of interactions in neurosurgical simu- 
lation that are not explicitly modeled in the proposed model, such 
as ventriculostomy and tumor debulking. This is one direction that 
we will look at in the future work. 
Conﬂict of interest 
None. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foun- 
dation of China ( 61773051 , 61761166011 , 51705016 ), Jiangxi Nat- 
ural Science Foundation ( 20171ACB20 0 07 ), Beijing Natural Sci- 
ence Foundation ( 4172048 ), Jiangxi Provincial Department of 
Science and Technology ( 20121BBE50023 , 20133BCB22002 ), and 
W. Hou, P.X. Liu and M. Zheng / Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 35–43 
43 
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 
( 2017JBZ003 ). 
Supplementary material 
Supplementary material associated with this article can be 
found, in the online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.03.018 . 
References 
[1] N. Gélinas-Phaneuf , R.F. Del Maestro , Surgical expertise in neurosurgery: inte- 
grating theory into practice, Neurosurgery 73 (Suppl. 1) (2013) 30–38 . 
[2] N. Choudhury , N. Gélinas-Phaneuf , S. Delorme , R. Del Maestro , Fundamentals 
of neurosurgery: virtual reality tasks for training and evaluation of technical 
skills, World Neurosurg. 80 (5) (2013) 9–19 . 
[3] S. Konakondla , R. Fong , C.M. Schirmer , Simulation training in neurosurgery: ad- 
vances in education and practice, Adv. Med. Educ. Pract. 8 (2017) 465–473 . 
[4] P.-Y. Lee , M.-H. Hu , M.-L. Wang , K.-C. Liu , J.-R. Wu , Real-time advanced spinal 
surgery via visible patient model and augmented reality system, Comput. 
Methods Programs Biomed. 113 (3) (2014) 869–881 . 
[5] G.S. Ruthenbeck , K.J. Reynolds , Virtual reality for medical training: the 
state-of-the-art, J. Simul. 9 (1) (2015) 16–26 . 
[6] M.I.-P.H. Cobb , J.M. Taekman , A.R. Zomorodi , L.F. Gonzalez , D.A. Turner , Simu- 
lation in neurosurgery: a brief review and commentary, World Neurosurg. 89 
(2016) 583–586 . 
[7] R. Rehder , M. Abd-El-Barr , K. Hooten , P. Weinstock , J.R. Madsen , A.R. Cohen , 
The role of simulation in neurosurgery, Child’s Nerv. Syst. 32 (1) (2016) 43–54 . 
[8] F.E. Alotaibi , G.A. AlZhrani , M.A. Mullah , A.J. Sabbagh , H. Azarnoush , A. Win- 
kler-Schwartz , R.F. Del Maestro , Assessing bimanual performance in brain tu- 
mor resection with neurotouch, a virtual reality simulator, Oper. Neurosurg. 11 
(1) (2015) 89–98 . 
[9] Y. Zou , P.X. Liu , A high-resolution model for soft tissue deformation based on 
point primitives, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 148 (2017) 113–121 . 
[10] J. Zhou , Z. Luo , C. Li , M. Deng , Real-time deformation of human soft tissues: 
a radial basis meshless 3D model based on Marquardt’s algorithm, Comput. 
Methods Programs Biomed. 153 (2018) 237–252 . 
[11] N. Lauzeral , D. Borzacchiello , M. Kugler , D. George , Y. Rémond , A. Hostettler , 
F. Chinesta , A model order reduction approach to create patient-speciﬁc me- 
chanical models of human liver in computational medicine applications., Com- 
put. Methods Programs Biomed. 170 (2019) 95–106 . 
[12] H. Wang , Y. Yang , Descent methods for elastic body simulation on the GPU, 
ACM Trans. Graph. 35 (6) (2016) 212:1–212:10 . 
[13] W. Hou , P.X. Liu , M. Zheng , S. Liu , A new FEM-based brain tissue model for 
neurosurgical simulation using the optimization implicit euler method, in: 
2018 37th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), IEEE, 2018, pp. 8578–8582 . 
[14] Ó. Civit Flores , Robust Interactive Simulation of Deformable Solids with De- 
tailed Geometry Using Corotational FEM, Ph.D. thesis, Universitat Politècnica 
de Catalunya, 2016 . 
[15] A. Nealen , M. Müller , R. Keiser , E. Boxerman , M. Carlson , Physically based de- 
formable models in computer graphics, in: Computer Graphics Forum, 25, Wi- 
ley Online Library, 2006, pp. 809–836 . 
[16] G.R. Joldes , A. Wittek , K. Miller , Real-time nonlinear ﬁnite element computa- 
tions on GPU–application to neurosurgical simulation, Comput. Methods Appl. 
Mech. Eng. 199 (49-52) (2010) 3305–3314 . 
[17] S. Delorme , D. Laroche , R. DiRaddo , R.F. Del Maestro , Neurotouch: a physic- 
s-based virtual simulator for cranial microneurosurgery training, Oper. Neuro- 
surg. 71 (suppl.1) (2012) 32–42 . 
[18] F. Faure , C. Duriez , H. Delingette , J. Allard , B. Gilles , S. Marchesseau , H. Talbot , 
H. Courtecuisse , G. Bousquet , I. Peterlik , et al. , Sofa: A multi-model framework 
for interactive physical simulation, in: Soft Tissue Biomechanical Modeling for 
Computer Assisted Surgery, Springer, 2012, pp. 283–321 . 
[19] S.F. Johnsen , Z.A. Taylor , M.J. Clarkson , J. Hipwell , M. Modat , B. Eiben , L. Han , 
Y. Hu , T. Mertzanidou , D.J. Hawkes , et al. , Niftysim: a GPU-based nonlinear ﬁ- 
nite element package for simulation of soft tissue biomechanics, Int. J. Comput. 
Assist. Radiol. Surg. 10 (7) (2015) 1077–1095 . 
[20] M. Müller , B. Heidelberger , M. Hennix , J. Ratcliff, Position based dynamics, J. 
Vis. Commun. Image Represent. 18 (2) (2007) 109–118 . 
[21] J. Bender , M. Müller , M.A. Otaduy , M. Teschner , M. Macklin , A survey on po- 
sition-based simulation methods in computer graphics, in: Computer Graphics 
Forum, 33, Wiley Online Library, 2014, pp. 228–251 . 
[22] M. Müller , N. Chentanez , T.-Y. Kim , M. Macklin , Strain based dynamics, in: Pro- 
ceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Ani- 
mation, Eurographics Association, 2014, pp. 149–157 . 
[23] T. Kugelstadt , E. Schömer , Position and orientation based cosserat rods, in: 
Symposium on Computer Animation, 2016, pp. 169–178 . 
[24] M. Camara , E. Mayer , A. Darzi , P. Pratt , Soft tissue deformation for surgical 
simulation: a position-based dynamics approach, Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. 
Surg. 11 (6) (2016) 919–928 . 
[25] Y. Duan , W. Huang , H. Chang , W. Chen , J. Zhou , S.K. Teo , Y. Su , C.K. Chui , 
S. Chang , Volume preserved mass–spring model with novel constraints for soft 
tissue deformation, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 20 (1) (2016) 268–280 . 
[26] Y. Peng , Y. Ma , Y. Wang , J. Shan , The application of interactive dynamic vir- 
tual surgical simulation visualization method, Multimedia Tools Appl. 76 (23) 
(2017) 25197–25214 . 
[27] Y. Sui , J.J. Pan , H. Qin , H. Liu , Y. Lu , Real-time simulation of soft tissue de- 
formation and electrocautery procedures in laparoscopic rectal cancer radical 
surgery, Int. J. Med. Rob. Comput. Assist. Surg. 13 (4) (2017) 1827:1–1827:12 . 
[28] J. Bender , M. Müller , M. Macklin , Position-based simulation methods in com- 
puter graphics, Eurographics (Tutorials), 2015 . 
[29] T. Liu , A.W. Bargteil , J.F. O’Brien , L. Kavan , Fast simulation of mass-spring sys- 
tems, ACM Trans. Graph. 32 (6) (2013) 214:1–214:7 . 
[30] S. Bouaziz , S. Martin , T. Liu , L. Kavan , M. Pauly , Projective dynamics: fusing 
constraint projections for fast simulation, ACM Trans. Graph. 33 (4) (2014) 
154:1–154:11 . 
[31] T.F. Gast , C. Schroeder , A. Stomakhin , C. Jiang , J.M. Teran , Optimization inte- 
grator for large time steps, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 21 (10) (2015) 
1103–1115 . 
[32] J. Cai , F. Lin , H.S. Seah , Graphical Simulation of Deformable Models, 2016 . 
[33] M. Overby , G.E. Brown , J. Li , R. Narain , Admm ⊇projective dynamics: fast sim- 
ulation of hyperelastic models with dynamic constraints, IEEE Trans. Vis. Com- 
put. Graph. 23 (10) (2017) 2222–2234 . 
[34] M. Macklin , M. Müller , N. Chentanez , Xpbd: position-based simulation of com- 
pliant constrained dynamics, in: Proceedings of the 9th International Confer- 
ence on Motion in Games, ACM, 2016, pp. 49–54 . 
[35] R. De Rooij , E. Kuhl , Constitutive modeling of brain tissue: current perspectives, 
Appl. Mech. Rev. 68 (1) (2016) 010801:1–010801:16 . 
[36] F.S. Sin , D. Schroeder , J. Barbi ˇc , Vega: Non-linear FEM deformable object simu- 
lator, in: Computer Graphics Forum, 32, Wiley Online Library, 2013, pp. 36–48 . 
[37] H. Si , Tetgen, a delaunay-based quality tetrahedral mesh generator, ACM Trans. 
Math. Softw. 41 (2) (2015) 11:1–11:36 . 
[38] H.R. Malone , O.N. Syed , M.S. Downes , A.L. D’ambrosio , D.O. Quest , M.G. Kaiser , 
Simulation in neurosurgery: a review of computer-based simulation environ- 
ments and their surgical applications, Neurosurgery 67 (4) (2010) 1105–1116 . 
[39] E. Drumwright , A fast and stable penalty method for rigid body simulation, 
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 14 (1) (2008) 231–240 . 
[40] A. Bargteil , T. Shinar , An introduction to physics-based animation, in: ACM SIG- 
GRAPH 2018 Courses, ACM, 2018, pp. 6:1–6:57 . 
