ORIGINAL REPORTS
Haptic Feedback, Force Feedback, and
Force-Sensing in Simulation Training for
Laparoscopy: A Systematic Overview
D1X XEvelien M Overtoom, D2X XMD,* D3X XTim Horeman, D4X XPhD,† D5X XFrank-Willem Jansen, D6X XMD, PhD,†,‡
D7X XJenny Dankelman, D8X XPhD,† and D9X XHenk W R Schreuder, D10X XMD, PhD*
*Department of Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht and Department of
Gynaecologic Oncology, UMC Utrecht Cancer Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands; †Department of Biomechanical
Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands; and
‡Department of Gynaecology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands
OBJECTIVES: To provide a systematic overview of the lit-
erature assessing the value of haptic and force feedback
in current simulators teaching laparoscopic surgical skills.
DATA SOURCES: The databases of Pubmed, Cochrane,
Embase, Web of Science, and Google Scholar were
searched to retrieve relevant studies published until Jan-
uary 31st, 2017. The search included laparoscopic sur-
gery, simulation, and haptic or force feedback and all
relevant synonyms.
METHODS: Duplicates were removed, and titles and
abstracts screened. The remaining articles were subse-
quently screened full text and included in this review if
they followed the inclusion criteria. A total of 2 types of
feedback have been analyzed and will be discussed sepa-
rately: haptic- and force feedback.
RESULTS: A total of 4023 articles were found, of which
87 could be used in this review. A descriptive analysis of
the data is provided. Results of the added value of haptic
interface devices in virtual reality are variable. Haptic
feedback is most important for more complex tasks. The
interface devices do not require the highest level of ﬁdel-
ity. Haptic feedback leads to a shorter learning curve
with a steadier upward trend. Concerning force feed-
back, force parameters are measured through force sens-
ing systems in the instrument and/or the environment.
These
parameters,
especially
in
combination
with
motion parameters, provide box trainers with an objec-
tive evaluation of laparoscopic skills. Feedback of force-
use both real time and postpractice has been shown to
improve training.
CONCLUSIONS: Haptic feedback is added to virtual real-
ity simulators to increase the ﬁdelity and thereby
improve training effect. Variable results have been found
from adding haptic feedback. It is most important for
more complex tasks, but results in only minor improve-
ments for novice surgeons. Force parameters and force
feedback in box trainers have been shown to improve
training results. ( J Surg Ed 76:242261.  2018 Associa-
tion of Program Directors in Surgery. Published by Elsev-
ier Inc. All rights reserved.)
KEY WORDS: Haptic feedback, Force feedback, Force
sensing, Laparoscopy, Simulation, Training
COMPETENCIES: Practice-Based Learning and Improve-
ment, Medical Knowledge, Patient Care
INTRODUCTION
Acquiring surgical skills in a nonclinical setting through
simulation includes fewer patient safety concerns and is
less time consuming than traditional methods.1-3 More-
over, simulation can be effectively used to train the more
complex psychomotor skills necessary for minimal inva-
sive surgery (MIS).4 Simulation has therefore become an
essential part of the training curriculum to prepare for
minimal invasive procedures, such as laparoscopy.5-7
One of the main goals of simulation training is to cre-
ate surgical realism at interactive rates.8 This entails
both a realistic environment as well as a realistic sense
of touch, including haptic perception.9 Haptic percep-
tion or feedback is a term used to describe the
Correspondence: Inquiries to Henk Schreuder MD, PhD, University Medical Cen-
tre Utrecht, Department of Gynaecology & Obstetrics, PO box 85500, Room
F05-126, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands, Tel: 0031(0)88 7556427; fax: 0031
(0)88 7555433; e-mail: h.w.r.schreuder@umcutrecht.nl
242
Journal of Surgical Education 
1931-7204/$30.00
© 2018 Association of Program Directors in Surgery. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsurg.2018.06.008
combination of tactile and kinesthetic perception.10
Haptic perception and feedback are controversial sub-
jects in laparoscopic training simulator design since hap-
tic feedback is reduced and distorted during MIS
because of the long instruments and friction inside the
trocars. On the other hand, haptic cues are essential dur-
ing surgery to control motor functions and render appro-
priate tissue handling skills.11,12 Tissue handling should
be gentle during surgery and require little force use,
since it causes tissue reaction or even damage and conse-
quently can result in intraoperative errors.4,13 Better task
performance is therefore associated with reduced force
application.14-16 Training should focus on improving tis-
sue-handling skills by proper use of force.14
Currently available simulating methods can be subdi-
vided into box-training, virtual reality (VR) and aug-
mented reality (AR) training. A box trainer (BT) provides
real haptic feedback but lacks a realistic environment and
objective results. VR on the other hand lacks haptic feed-
back but provides objective results. AR provides both
haptic feedback during training and objective results.2
Haptic feedback has been suggested to improve simu-
lation training. In VR-trainers, haptic interface devices
have been developed to create artiﬁcial haptic feedback,
while BTs, which already provide natural haptic feed-
back, are supplied with force sensing and force feedback
mechanisms to improve training results.10,16-28 Although
haptic and force feedback have been widely recognized
as important concepts within laparoscopic simulation
training, several issues have remained unresolved. These
issues surround the characteristics that will result in
optimal skill acquisition, such as ﬁdelity of a simulator
and the composition of the optimal training curriculum.
With this literature overview, we aim to assess the
beneﬁts of force and haptic feedback in laparoscopic
simulation. Should force and haptic feedback be used in
laparoscopic simulation and more speciﬁcally when
training skill acquisition and tissue manipulation? The
available literature on haptic feedback, force feedback,
and force sensing in simulation training used for laparo-
scopic surgery will be researched.
METHODS
A systematic search was conducted in Pubmed, Embase,
Cochrane, Google Scholar, and Web of Science to retrieve
relevant studies published until January 31st, 2017. The
search method developed for each database comprised of
relevant synonyms of haptic and force feedback and force
sensing, simulation, and laparoscopy (Table 1).
One assessor (EO) removed duplicates and subse-
quently screened the titles and abstracts of all remaining
articles for inclusion. Articles were included if they
focused on either haptic or force feedback or force sens-
ing in simulation training for laparoscopy. Articles
included in this systematic literature review include
experimental studies as well as patent applications,
opinionated papers, and editorials about both haptic
and force feedback. Review articles were excluded since
they do not present original data. They were, however,
assessed for relevant references. Since haptic rendering
is a process independent of the haptic interface devices,
articles solely describing the development of algorithms
enabling force feedback or calculating deformation were
excluded. The in- and exclusion criteria are summarized
in Table 2. The remaining articles were screened full
text by 2 assessors (EO and TH). Any disagreements
regarding selection and inclusion of articles were
resolved through consensus. Each selected article was
hand searched for relevant cross-references as were any
reviews on the subject.
Haptic, force, and tactile feedback are terms that are
often used disorderly. In this article, haptic feedback is
used to describe the combination of kinesthetic and tac-
tile feedback, whereas tactile feedback is used to
describe the perception of pressure, vibration, and tex-
ture. Force feedback on the other hand is used to
describe the actual feedback provided by a device con-
cerning the use of forces and torques.
Since this review involves haptic feedback as well as
force feedback and force sensing, the articles identi-
ﬁed cover a wide range of different subjects. Haptic
feedback in VR simulation and force feedback in box
training will be separately discussed. We will ﬁrst dis-
cuss VR trainers. The types of haptic interface devices
that have been designed to create artiﬁcial haptic feed-
back, the necessary ﬁdelity level and articles discussing
the effect of haptic feedback in VR trainers on training
results will be covered. Subsequently, we will elabo-
rate on force sensing and force feedback in BTs by dis-
cussing force measurement systems, force parameters,
and the effect of force feedback. Finally, different
types of simulating trainers will be compared to one
another.
RESULTS
Search Strategy and Study Selection
A total of 4023 potentially relevant articles were
retrieved through the search, of which 87 original
articles could be used in this review. The articles were
not
individually
appraised
since
many
of
studies
included are descriptive and were ineligible for such
appraisal. Figure 1 displays a ﬂow chart of the study
selection process.
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
243
TABLE 1. Search Methods
Database
Search Syntax
Results
PubMed
#1
(((haptic [tiab] OR tactile [tiab] OR tactual [tiab]) OR (force* [tiab] OR power* [tiab]
OR strength* [tiab] OR tensile [tiab] OR intrinsic [tiab] OR pressure [tiab] OR
(mechanical [tiab] AND process* [tiab]) OR “Mechanical Processes”[Mesh]) AND
(feedback [tiab] OR assessment [tiab] OR evaluation [tiab] OR reaction [tiab] OR
repl* [tiab] OR response* [tiab]) OR “Feedback”[Mesh])) OR (((force* [tiab] OR
power* [tiab] OR strength* [tiab] OR tensile [tiab] OR intrinsic [tiab] OR pressure
[tiab] OR (mechanical [tiab] AND process* [tiab]) OR “Mechanical Processes”[-
Mesh]) AND (sense [tiab] OR sensing [tiab] OR measure [tiab] OR measurement
[tiab] OR analysis [tiab] OR amount [tiab] OR appraisal [tiab] OR assessment
[tiab] OR evaluation [tiab] OR “Weights and Measures”[Mesh])))
593
#2
((simulation* [tiab] OR imitation* [tiab] OR reproduction* [tiab] OR “simulation
model” [tiab] OR (physical [tiab] AND model* [tiab]) OR “virtual reality” [tiab] OR
“augmented reality” [tiab] OR “box trainer”[tiab]OR “box training”[tiab] OR (box
[tiab] AND train* [tiab]) OR ((surgical[tiab] OR skill*[tiab]) AND training[tiab])
OR “Computer Simulation”[Mesh]))
#3
((laparoscop* [tiab] OR peritoneoscop* [tiab] OR celioscop* [tiab] OR endoscop*
[tiab]) OR (((laparoscopic [tiab] OR endoscopic [tiab]) OR (minimal [tiab] AND
invasive [tiab])) AND ((surgical [tiab] AND procedure* [tiab]) OR surgery [tiab]
OR surgeries [tiab])) OR “Laparoscopy”[Mesh] NOT (ﬂexible [tiab] AND endos-
copy [tiab]))
#4
#1 AND #2 AND #3
Embase
#1
"tactile feedback"/exp OR ‘tactile feedback’:ab,ti OR "haptic feedback":ab,it OR
"tactual feedback":ab,ti
994
#2
haptic:ab,it OR tactile:ab,ti OR tactual:ab,ti
#3
force:ab,ti OR power:ab,ti OR strength:ab,ti OR tensile:ab,ti OR intrinsic:ab,ti OR
pressure:ab,ti OR "mechanical process":it,ab OR forces:ab,ti OR powers:ab,ti OR
strengths:it,ab OR "mechanical processes":ab,ti
#4
"feedback system"/exp OR feedback:ab,ti OR assessment:ab,ti OR evaluation:ab,
ti OR reaction:ab,ti OR reply:ab,ti OR response:ab,ti OR assessments:ab,ti OR
evaluations:ab,ti OR reactions:ab,ti OR replies:ab,ti OR responses:ab,ti
#5
"measurements"/exp OR measurement:ab,ti OR sense:ab,ti OR sensing:ab,ti OR
measure:ab,ti OR measurementab,ti OR analysis:ab,ti OR amount:ab,ti OR
appraisal:ab,ti OR assessment:ab,ti OR evaluation:ab,ti
#6
#1 OR ((#2 OR #3) AND #4) OR ((#2 OR#3 AND #5)
#7
"simulation"/exp OR simulation:ab,ti OR imitation:ab,ti OR reproduction:ab,ti OR
model:ab,ti OR models:ab,ti OR "simulation model":ab,ti OR "virtual reality":ab,ti
OR "augmented reality":ab,ti OR "box training":ab,ti OR "box trainer":ab,ti OR
((surgical:ab,ti OR skills:ab,ti) AND training)
#8
"laparoscopy"/exp OR laparoscopy:ab,ti OR peritoneoscopy:ab,ti OR celioscopy:
ab,ti OR "endoscopy":ab,ti OR videolaparoscopy:ab,ti
#9
#6 AND #7 AND #8
Cochrane
#1
tactile:ti,ab or haptic:ti,ab or tactual:ti,ab
67
#2
force:ti,ab or power:ti,ab or strength:ti,ab or tensile:ti,ab or intrinsic:ti,ab or pres-
sure:ti,ab “mechanical process”:ti,ab
#3
“feedback system”:ti,ab or feedback:ti,ab or assessment:ti,ab or evaluation:ti,ab or
reaction:ti,ab or reply:ti,ab or response:ti,ab or assessments:ti,ab or evaluations:
ti,ab or reactions:ti,ab or replies:ti,ab or responses:ti,ab
#4
MeSH descriptor: [Mechanical Processes] explode all trees
#5
MeSH descriptor: [Feedback] explode all trees
#6
(#1 or #2 or #4) and (#3 or #5)
#7
measurement:ti,ab or sense:ti,ab or sensing:ti,ab or measure:ti,ab or measurement:
ti,ab or analysis:ti,ab or amount:ti,ab or appraisal:ti,ab or assessment:ti,ab or
evaluation:ti,ab
#8
MeSH descriptor: [Weights and Measures] explode all trees
#9
(#2 or #4) and (#7 or #8)
#10
simulation:ti,ab or imitation:ti,ab or reproduction:ti,ab or model:ti,ab or models:ti,
ab or “simulation model*”:ti,ab or “virtual reality”:ti,ab or “augmented reality”:ti,
(continued)
244
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
VR Simulation
Haptic Interface Devices in VR Training
The majority of the studies identiﬁed covered the design
of a haptic interface device build for VR trainers or
described the use of these devices. A total of 39 articles
elaborated on this subject.
Several articles describe the development of a simula-
tor with haptic feedback. By far the most often described
device is the PHANToM, an invention of Thomas Massie
at MIT and issued by SensAble technologies.26-33 Instead
of using the PHANToM device, some researchers have
themselves developed a device or a complete simulator
with haptic feedback incorporated.10,27,34-50 The devel-
oped simulators cover different laparoscopic procedures
such as cholecystectomy,26 herniorhaphy40 and laparo-
scopic adjustable gastric band surgery33 or basic laparo-
scopic tasks such as the tasks used in the fundamentals
of laparoscopic surgery program,31 palpation techni-
ques42 and cutting tasks.50
Fidelity of the VR simulator. Fidelity describes the resem-
blance of a simulator to the actual surgical procedure in
the operating room.51 The combination of mechanical
actuators and the software system deﬁnes the ﬁdelity of
a haptic interface device. Fidelity of a simulator device is
thought to affect training results.30,35-38,48,51,52,54,55 Hap-
tic devices are thought to be most realistic when they
TABLE 1 (CONTINUED)
Database
Search Syntax
Results
ab or “box training”:ti,ab or “box trainer”:ti,ab or “surgical training”:ti,ab or
“skills training”:ti,ab
#11
MeSH descriptor: [Computer Simulation] explode all trees
#12
laparoscopy:ti,ab OR laparoscop*:ti,ab or peritoneoscop*:ti,ab or celioscop*:ti,
ab or “endoscopy”:ti,ab or videolaparoscop*:ti,ab or ((surgical:ti,ab and proce-
dure:ti,ab) or surger*:ti,ab and laparoscop*:ti,ab)
#13
MeSH descriptor: [Laparoscopy] explode all trees
#14
(#6 or #9) and (#10 or #11) and (#12 or #13)
Google Scholar
#1
((»haptic OR »force) AND »feedback) OR ((»force AND »sensing))
1.430
#2
»simulation OR ((»skills OR »surgical) AND »training)
#3
(»laparoscopy OR »endoscopy) NOT »ﬂexible
#4
((journal AND paper) OR ‘journal paper’)
#5
#1 AND #2 AND #3 AND #4 + last 5 years (2011)
Web of Science
#1
(TS = haptic OR TS = tactile OR TS = tactual) AND (TS = feedback OR TS = assess-
ment OR TS = evaluation OR TS = reaction OR TS = repl* OR TS = response*) OR
(TS = force* OR TS = power* OR TS = strength* OR TS = tensile OR TS = intrinsic
OR TS = pressure OR (TS = mechanical AND TS = process*)) AND ((TS = sense OR
TS = sensing OR TS = measure OR TS = measurement OR TS = analysis OR
TS = amount OR TS = appraisal OR TS = assessment OR TS = evaluation) OR
(TS = feedback OR TS = assessment OR TS = evaluation OR TS = reaction OR
TS = repl* OR TS=response*))
939
#2
(TS = simulation* OR TS = imitation* OR TS = reproduction*) OR TS = "simulation
model” OR TS = "physical model” OR TS = "virtual reality" OR TS = "augmented
reality" OR ((TS = box AND TS = train*) OR (TS = surgical OR TS = skill*)) AND
(TS = train*)
#3
(TS = laparoscop* OR TS = peritoneoscop* OR TS = celioscop* OR TS = endoscop*
NOT TS = "ﬂexible endoscopy") OR ((TS = laparoscopic OR TS = endoscopic) OR
(TS = minimal AND TS = invasive)) AND ((TS = surgical AND TS = procedure*) OR
TS = surger*)
#4
#1 AND #2 AND #3
Date of search: 31-01-2017
TABLE 2. In—and Exclusion Criteria
Inclusion criteria
- Corresponding domain and determinants
- Haptic or force feedback; force sensing
- Simulation trainers
- Laparoscopy
- Original data
Exclusion criteria:
- Systematic reviews
- Flexible endoscopy
- Colonoscopy
- Endoscopic surgery simulator
- Neurosurgery
- Robotic surgery
- Vascular surgery
- Natural oriﬁce transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES)
- Trocar/Needle insertion training system
- Algorithm
- Haptic rendering
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
245
feature compactness, high sustained output force capa-
bility, low inertia, low friction, high structural stiffness,
0 backlash, an absence of mechanical singularities, good
responsiveness, and narrow-ranged bandwidth.35-38,46
The degrees of freedom (DOF) of the different haptic
interface devices described in the literature range from 2
to 6. Devices with 2 DOFs are solely capable of simulat-
ing a movement such as poking or swinging in a single
plane, while a device with 6 DOFs facilitates more com-
plicated movements and actions in multiple directions.
A human body allows for a total of 6 DOF: forward/back-
ward, up/down, left/right, pitch, yaw, and roll.55 Due to
limitations of a surgeon’s workspace, this number is
decreased to 4 DOFs during laparoscopic surgery.37 The
highest ﬁdelity is reached when the haptic interface
device possesses the amount of DOFs similar to those
available during laparoscopy.51 A higher number of
DOFs on the other hand can negatively affect other
mechanical properties such as inertia. Some studies
therefore encourage using fewer DOFs.26,35,53,54 The
software system of the device can further employ differ-
ent methods to imitate tissue properties, which can be
divided into linear and nonlinear methods. Force-dis-
placement of real human tissue is nonlinear. Linear
FIGURE 1. Study selection process.
246
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
methods, however, are easier to achieve. Although ﬁdel-
ity is higher with a nonlinear mechanism, Kim et al.
found practically identical training effectiveness for both
methods.51 Since haptic feedback devices are compli-
cated to build and entail additional costs, Hiemstra et al.
have proposed an alternative method to raise ﬁdelity.
They propose to adjust the kinematic behavior of objects
in a VR environment by adding the instrument velocity
and physical properties of the objects. A software pro-
gram was used that was able to add kinematic interac-
tions to the objects in the VR trainer that were based on
velocity of laparoscopic instruments and on the physical
properties of the concerning objects. This has been
found to improve learning curves compared with VR
trainers without kinematic interaction.52
Haptic Feedback in VR Training
Surgeons have indicated during a preliminary analysis
that they consider lack of tactile feedback the most
important weakness of VR trainers and that haptic feed-
back is sometimes even more important than visual feed-
back.55,56 At the same time, they are critical about the
currently available systems and prefer the natural haptic
feedback such as available in fresh frozen cadavers to
the simulated haptic feedback in VR trainers.57 Addi-
tional friction caused by haptic feedback for instance, is
thought to interfere with the haptic sensation, counter-
balancing the added realism, and confusing an inexperi-
enced operator.58-60 Additionally, haptic feedback is
sometimes considered an unnecessary stimulus for nov-
ice surgeons during training. Presumably, while acquir-
ing a surgical skill, novice surgeons have less spare
attentional resources to attend to these haptic cues.11
The beneﬁts of adding haptic feedback to simulators
aimed at inexperienced surgeons is therefore question-
able. The following section describes the research exe-
cuted to investigate the effect of haptic feedback in VR
simulators on training results and learning or perfor-
mance curves.
Training results and haptic feedback. A total of 8 studies com-
pared the training results of VR trainers with haptic feed-
back
devices
to those
without.7,11,53,61-64
Table
3
provides an overview of these studies. A signiﬁcant dif-
ference between devices with and without haptic feed-
back is found in 6 studies,11,30,53,61,62,64 while 2 studies
do not present a signiﬁcant difference.7,63 Several impor-
tant differences can be identiﬁed between these studies
that might explain the contradicting results. First, differ-
ent types of tasks have been performed ranging in difﬁ-
culty. Second, studies use several different outcome
measures to assess task performance. Third, the test pro-
tocols used, vary between studies. For example, Panait
et al. let participants perform tasks
in both the
nonhaptic and haptic setting,62 while participants are
split into 2 groups that are trained in either a haptic or
nonhaptic setting in other studies.62 Finally, studies use
different types of simulators and haptic interface devices
with varying levels of ﬁdelity. The difference in perfor-
mance between the simulators used could have resulted
in contradictory result. Comparing simulation trainers
with different levels of ﬁdelity, Khan et al. report that if
haptic feedback is added to a device, skills improve sig-
niﬁcantly more.30 Therefore, the differences in ﬁdelity
levels between studies alone cannot be satisfactorily
used to clarify contradicting results between studies.
One study on the effect of haptic feedback is not
included in Table 3. This study concludes that time to
complete a task is signiﬁcantly lower when haptic feed-
back is provided. However, the setting without haptic
feedback also lacks visual feedback. Therefore, it is
impossible to distinguish the effect of haptic feedback
from the effect of visual feedback.32
Overall, it seems that advanced tasks requiring supe-
rior precision, beneﬁtted more from haptic feedback
than basic tasks,62 speciﬁcally once more accuracy and
delicate tool control are required.53 Needle driving tasks
also beneﬁt more from haptic feedback during training
than knot-tying tasks.64 The effect of haptic feedback on
training results is most signiﬁcant at the beginning of
training.64 Concerning outcome measures, 5 studies
demonstrate that the time to complete a task is shorter
as a result of haptic feedback.11,53,62,64,65 On the other
hand, instrument movement is slower7 and tracking
time similar for VR trainers with and without haptic
feedback.63
The usefulness of haptic feedback for novice surgeons
in the skill-acquisition phase was investigated by Cao
et al.11 They apply a method called cognitive loading.
This method reduces the available attentional resources
by asking participants to solve mental arithmetic prob-
lems while executing a task on the VR trainer. Haptic
feedback was found to counteract cognitive loading.
The beneﬁcial effect of haptic feedback increased when
participants were more experienced with laparoscopic
surgery.11
Learning or performance curve and haptic feedback. Since it is
not possible to measure learning directly, performance
scores, which combine different outcome measures, are
often used. A performance or learning curve is then cre-
ated from the scores acquired when a task is completed
multiple times.2 The learning curve associated with lapa-
roscopy is known to be very gradual. At least 100 prac-
tice
cases
are
recommended
for
more
complex
procedures.16 VR trainers accelerate this process in novi-
ces and experts.66,67 The effect of VR trainers is most sig-
niﬁcant during the early part training.67 A total of 4
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
247
TABLE 3. Effect of Haptic or Force Feedback on Performance Scores on VR Trainers
Article
Participants
Type of simulator
Task
Independent
Measure
Dependent Measure
Conclusion
N
Type
Cao et al.11
30
No, I, E
MIST-VR
ProMIS
Transfer-place
task
- Cognitive load-
ing
- Haptic feedback
Experience
- Time to task completion
- Errors
- Number of math problems solved
Haptic feedback enhances
performance and counter-
balances cognitive load.
Kim et al.53
24
No
Self-developed with
Phantom
Pulling and
cutting
Haptic feedback:
linear, nonlinear,
no feedback
- Total Performance Score
- Time
- Cut Accuracy
- Push Accuracy
- Obstacle Avoidance
Skill transfer improves with
haptic feedback. No dif-
ference between linear
and nonlinear model.
Khan et al.30
25
No, E
Mouse
Joystick with/without
haptic feedback
Phatnom Omni
Hand Manipulator
Poking and pre-
cision
Peg transfer
Fidelity of
simulator
- Economy of movement
- Speed
- Precision
Haptic feedback improved
result even on simulators
with a lower ﬁdelity such
as a joystick.
Lamata et al.79
32
No, I, E
Self-developed with
Phantom
Pulling and
pushing
- Experience
- Visual feedback
Haptic feedback
- Tissue consistency
- Conﬁdence
- Tissue identiﬁcation
If tissue consistency informa-
tion is to be delivered,
haptic feedback is
necessary.
Panait et al.62
10
No
Self-developed with
Phantom
Peg transfer
Pattern cutting
- Haptic feedback
- Time to complete task
- Grasping tension
- Instrument path length
- Dexterity
- Missed objects
- Tissue damage
Haptic feedback improves
performance measures
and reduces errors espe-
cially for advanced tasks.
Salkini et al.7
20
No
Simbionix LapMentor
II
Grasp, Pul and
Cut
- Haptic feedback
- Videogame play-
ing
- Accuracy
- Economy of movement
- Average speed
Less effect of haptic feed-
back on performance than
hypothesized.
Thompson et al.63
33
No
Simbionix LapMentor
II
Cholecystec-
tomy; Basic
tasks
- Haptic feedback
- Time
- Efﬁciency
- No of movements
- Path length
Speed
No signiﬁcant effect of hap-
tic feedback.
Zhou et al.64
20
No
MIST-VR
ProMIS
Knot tying
- Haptic feedback
- Time to complete
Signiﬁcant difference espe-
cially in ﬁrst 5 hours.
248
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
studies have evaluated the learning curves of VR simula-
tors with and without haptic feedback.9,53,63,64 An over-
view of these articles is presented in Table 4.
The effect of haptic feedback on the learning curve
seems to depend on the task performed. The learning
curve of participants training with haptic feedback per-
forming basic tasks started at a much higher level, was
more regular, showed a more steadily upward trend,
and showed less variability between the participants
when compared to learning curves obtained in a setting
without haptic feedback.53 The effect of haptic feedback
on learning curves is most signiﬁcant in the early train-
ing phase.9 When performing more complicated tasks,
the difference between learning in a haptic and nonhap-
tic setting were not found to be signiﬁcant.63 Knot-tying
tasks in a VR simulator with haptic feedback resulted in
steeper learning curves and less variance between sub-
jects compared to a simulator without haptic.64
Force Feedback and VR
The use of force feedback to improve skill acquirement
is most often attributed to BTs. A total of 4 studies have
discussed force feedback in a VR setting.10,24,68.69 Novi-
ces were found to apply signiﬁcantly higher amounts of
force for both basic and more complex probing and
grasping tasks and basic sweeping tasks than experts in
a
VR
setting
and
to
use
more
abrupt
tool
movements.24,68,69
Visual
force
feedback
improved
force and motion parameters of residents on both basic
and more complex tasks in a VR trainer.68 Force feed-
back has also been effectively used during VR training,
to teach novices how far to insert laparoscopic tools.10
BTs
Force Measurement Systems
The ability of measuring forces is separately added to
BTs. These force measurement sensors can be divided
into 2 different categories; force sensors in the instru-
ment, and force sensors in the environment of the instru-
ment. Force sensors in the instruments measure a
representative of the force exerted with the instrument
tip on the surroundings. Force sensors in the environ-
ment measure a representative of the reaction force and
can be located in and under the training task or at the
instrument incision site.
Sensors in the instruments should not restrict or inﬂu-
ence the instrument movements during training. When
the sensor is placed in the instrument shaft, it is prefera-
bly small and often built out of layers of piezoelectric,
resistive,
optical,
or
capacitive
materials.70-73
This
approach requires signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of the instru-
ment but can provide a relatively good output in terms
of sensitivity, accuracy, and force direction as all the
TABLE 4. Effect of Haptic Feedback on Learning Curves in VR Trainers
Article
Participants
Research
method
Groups
Outcome Measure
N
Type
Kim et al.53
24
No
Training results
pre and post
test
VR with linear
haptic
feedback
VR with nonlin-
ear haptic
feedback
Control
- Total Performance Score
- Time
- Cut Accuracy
- Push Accuracy
- Obstacle Avoidance
Str€om et al.9
38
I
Post test
VR with early
haptic
feedback
VR with late
haptic
feedback
-
- Total Performance Score
Thompson et al.63
33
No
Post-test
training
Haptics
No haptics
Control
- Time
- Efﬁciency
- No of movements
- Path length
- Speed
Zhou et al.64
20
No
Post test
Haptics
No haptics
-
- Time to complete successful
knot
- Instrument path*
- Instrument smoothness*
- Error*
- Overall score*
AR = Augmented reality; Box = boxtrainer; VR = virtual reality.
E = expert; I = intermediate; No = novice.
SP = single port; TP = 2 port.
*Outcome measures restricted to either the haptics or the no haptics simulator.
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
249
forces are transmitted through the sensor. If instrument
modiﬁcation is not allowed, strain gauges glued on, or
placed around, the shaft can be used to measure the
strain in the metal shaft due to bending of the instru-
ment.74 Strain gauges, however, are inﬂuenced by tem-
perature changes and the glue is not resistant to
chemicals and autoclave sterilization. As the force is not
transmitted through the gauges directly the output/
stress relation needs to be determined through calibra-
tion. Independent of the location of the sensors on the
instrument, there is always a connection between sensor
and controller that potentially inﬂuences the user.
There are 3 important advantages of forces measure-
ment in the direct environment of the instrument over
integration of a force sensor in the instrument. First,
standard instruments can be used and changed during
the training based on the user’s preference. Second,
there is no critical size requirement for the sensor as it is
often located under or in the training task.17,18 Third,
deformation of force sensors integrated in or under a
training task is allowed to some degree as the tissues
that are manipulated are also highly deformable. A force
sensor integrated in the instrument should not inﬂuence
the instrument stiffness of the instrument. It is therefore
much more expensive to build. A disadvantage of a
signed force sensor under the task is the measurement
of reaction forces only. It can therefore be impossible to
determine which of the 2 instruments exerts force on
the task. By placing 2 sensors between the 2 instrument
shafts and top plate at each of the incision sites, the con-
tact force for each instrument can be used as an addi-
tional
source
of
information
for
bimanual
skills
assessment.75
Force-Sensing for Assessment of Surgical Skills
Force can be used as a parameter in the training of lapa-
roscopic skills such as grasping16 and palpation25 or as a
measure of tissue manipulation in general.76 It can also
be used in trainers to provide feedback to the users.
Grasping tissue results in a combination of different
forces exerted on the tissue, including pinch forces to
grab the piece of tissue and pull forces moving the tissue
elsewhere. The combination of these forces inﬂuences
whether tissue will slip, be damaged or is grasped suc-
cessfully. Using a force-sensing grasper during laparo-
scopic surgery, Susmitha et al. have found that more
surgical experience leads to a reduced use of pinching
force, as do tissue type and visual feedback.16 It was fur-
ther found that novices applied signiﬁcantly higher
amounts of force for probing, sweeping, and grasping
tasks than experts in VR simulators.24
An assortment of possible force parameters is men-
tioned in the literature. The most often used parameters
are maximum absolute force and mean absolute nonzero
force, which is the force averaged across all samples dur-
ing the time that the force exerted was above 0. Some
parameters are not directly measured, but can be calcu-
lated such as the rate of change (derivative of used force)
and total force use over time (integral of used force).77
Table 5 provides an overview of the different force
parameters.15,17,18,75-81 Force use is thought to be a
direct measure of tissue handling skill. This is a measure
of how roughly the tissue is treated and if tissue damage
has occurred. Damage to tissue occurs when more than
1.5 N of tractive force is used during suturing.4
The use of force-based metrics is a better indication of
performance than metrics of time or position informa-
tion alone.77 It is recommended to use a combination of
different parameters to assess tissue handling skills.
Assessment of the training of novice and intermediate
surgeons especially should include force parameters as
well as motion parameters such as pathway and position
information.75 Both expert and novice surgeons have
been found to misinterpret use of force, which results in
excessive use of force by both groups. Training with
force feedback and force parameters is therefore hypoth-
esized to be beneﬁcial for both novices and experts.14
Differentiating Power
Discrimination between different levels of experience is
thought to be a good measure of the training ability of a
simulator. Table 6 displays results of the different studies
on this subject. Level of experience is dependent upon
the amount of accomplished laparoscopic procedures or
the postgraduate year.
Table 6 demonstrates that the differentiating power of
force parameters varies for different task sets. Force
parameters on a cutting task are not able to discriminate
between novices and experts,77 while the result of force
use during peg transfer and needle driving does differ
signiﬁcantly between novices and experts18,19 and
between novices, intermediates and experts.17 Results
of more difﬁcult tasks such as tissue handling, suturing
and knot tying are more ambiguous. Trejos et al. have
found the strongest correlations between experience
and force-based metrics during suturing and knot-tying
tasks.77 Cundy et al. also report signiﬁcant differences in
mean force application during a task involving suturing
and intracorporeal knot tying.22 Horeman et al. describe
that despite the high discriminating power of the param-
eters that represent the maximal force value measured,
the mean force value and force variability are not
strongly correlated to surgical experience during knot
tying due to minimal contact between tissue and instru-
ment tips.20 Concerning tissue handling, Horeman et al.
found that discrimination was best measurable by com-
bining motion and force parameters in more dynamic
tasks.75 Correlations during a tissue handling task in the
250
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
study by Trejos et al. were signiﬁcant for many force
parameters, but not as strong as those during suturing
and knot-tying tasks.77 An important difference between
these studies is that Trejos et al. use sensitized laparo-
scopic instruments to measure tool-tissue interaction
forces at the tip of the instrument,77 while the other
studies measure the forces exerted on the tissue.17,20,75
One study is not included in Table 6 since it is not
reported whether or not differences are signiﬁcant.25 It
reports that mean force use of novices and experts
showed very different patterns. While experts tended to
use overall low forces with a characteristic peak at the
end of the task as they tighten the knot, novices used
much higher forces throughout the entire task.25
Although the exact parameters used as performance
metrics for different tasks are variable, several differen-
ces between novices and experts have been clariﬁed.
Novices
tend
to
use
higher
mean
forces
than
experts.17,18,20,22,77 The used forces are higher in the
course of the complete task with higher peak forces and
bigger force volumes for most complex tasks. While
tying a knot, novices tend to exert higher maximum
forces for longer periods of time and the regularity and
smoothness of the applied forces are signiﬁcantly better
for experts.20,25,77
Force Feedback
A total of 9 studies have concentrated on using force
feedback in BTs. Feedback can be provided in 3 different
ways: auditory, visual, and haptic feedback. Since audi-
tory feedback is unpractical in an operation room (OR)-
setting, only visual and tactile feedbacks have been
investigated.82 Minimizing the time delay between the
movement and feedback is essential to create realistic
instrument movement.19
TABLE 5. Overview Different Force Parameters
Force Parameter
Deﬁnition
In
Used in
Maximum absolute force
Maximum value in the absolute force vector
Newton
Cundy et al.17
Hanna et al.15
Horeman et al.18,75,76
Rodrigues et al.12,80
Mean absolute nonzero force
Averaged mean absolute force of periods during
training in which the force was not 0
Newton
Cundy et al.17
Horeman et al.18,20,75
Rodrigues et al.12,80
Wottawa et al.81
Mean absolute force
The total mean absolute force during measurement
Newton
Horeman et al.78
Rodrigues et al.12
Force volume
Volume spanned around the 3 largest standard devia-
tions of the force in an ellipsoid
Newton/second
Cundy et al.17
Horeman et al.75,78
Rodrigues et al.12,80
Maximum force area/peak
force
The maximum force area indicates the largest force
area. This is created between the moment in time
when the absolute force becomes higher than 0 until
the moment it becomes 0 again.
Newton-seconds
Horeman et al.78
Wottawa et al.81
Peak to peak value
Sum of the tissue reaction force and 2 times the trocar
friction. A complete cycle of pulling tissue.
Newton
Lamata et al.79
Maximum temporal slope
The maximal increase rate of the amount of force
used.
Newton/second
Lamata et al.79
Force range
The differences between the minimum and maximum
force applied during a task
Newton
Trejos et al.77
Interquartile range
This only takes into account the 50% of the data clos-
est to the median
Newton
Trejos et al.77
Force area/integral of the force
A measure combining the total force used over a cer-
tain time.
Newton/second
Trejos et al.77
Force derivatives
The derivatives of force can indicate the consistency
and rate of change of the applied force.
Newton/second
Trejos et al.77
Smoothness of the applied
force
Measured as the third derivative of force, it calculates
the regularity and uniformity of the contact force.
Newton/second
Trejos et al.77
Left and right maximum abdom-
inal force
This represents the absolute abdominal force in the left
and the right trocar
Newton
Horeman et al.76
SP maximum abdominal force
The absolute abdominal force in the single-port trocar
Newton
Horeman et al.76
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
251
TABLE 6. Differentiation Power of Force Parameters in Box Trainers
Article
Participants
Task
Dependent Measure
Results
N
Type
p Value
Cundy et al.17
18
No, I, E
Peg transfer
- Mean relative nonzero force
NoIE
0.006
- Maximum force
0.020
- Force magnitude
0.001
- Force error
<0.001
Suturing with
intracorporeal
knot
- Mean relative nonzero force
0.018
- Maximum force
0.033
- Force magnitude/force error
<0.001
Horeman et al.18
10
No, E
Needle-driving
- Max force
NoE
<0.017
- Mean absolute nonzero force
<0.005
Horeman et al.20,*
32
No, E
Needlle-driving
- Mean absolute force/Standard deviation
NoE
0.001
- Max absolute force
<0.001
- Volume
0.022
- Force Peak
<0.05
Knot-tying
- Mean absolute force, Standard deviation,
Volume
>0.05
- Max absolute force
0.001
- Force Peak
0.027
Horeman et al.75
42
No, I, E
Tissue attachment
under traction
- Max absolute force
NoI
>0.05
IE
0.042
NoE
<0.05
- Mean absolute nonzero force
NoI/IE/NoE
>0.05
- Force volume
NoI
0.028
IE
0.034
NoE
>0.05
- Max force area
NoI/NoE
>0.05
IE
<0.05
- STD force
NoI/IE
>0.05
NoE
<0.05
Placement of
silicone wire
- Max absolute force
NoI
>0.05
IE
0.002
NoE
<0.001
- Mean absolute nonzero force
NoI/IE/NoE
>0.05
- Force volume
NoI/IE
<0.05
NoE
>0.05
- Max force area
NoI/NoE
>0.05
IE
0.036
- STD force
NoI/IE
>0.05
NoE
0.017
Javaraman et al.22
20
No, E
Suturing
- Total force
NoE
>0.05
- Grasping force
0.025
- Torsion force
0.31
Trejos et al.77
30
No, E
Palpation
- Grasp mean, max, IQR
NoE
<0.05/>0.05**
- Grasp integral, second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
- Grasp ﬁrst derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
- Cartesian forces mean, IQR
>0.05/>0.05**
- Cartesian forces maximum,
integral, ﬁrst, second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
Cutting
- Grasp mean, maximum, IQR, integral,
ﬁrst, second, third derivative
>0.05
- Cartesian forces mean, integral, second,
third derivative
<0.05
Tissue handling
- Grasp mean, IQR
>0.05/>0.05**
- Grasp maximum, integral, ﬁrst derivative
>0.05/<0.05**
- Grasp second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
- Cartesian forces mean, maximum, IQR
>0.05/>0.05**
- Cartesian forces integral, ﬁrst, second,
third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
(continued)
252
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
A total of 7 studies have investigated visual force feed-
back systems.10,12,20,24,78,83,84 These systems provide
feedback either real time, during the task, or after having
ﬁnished the task. Both methods have had positive effects
on training results.12,20,78,84 Real-time feedback can be
provided as a constant feedback signal that is present
throughout the entire task, but also in an intermittent
manner. Smit et al. have compared constant visual feed-
back with band-with and fade-in visual feedback.88 Band-
with visual force feedback entails that feedback is pre-
sented only if a certain threshold is exceeded. With fade-
in visual force feedback, the amount of feedback shown
is dependent upon the skill-level of the participant. All
types of real-time feedback improve tissue-handling skills
with best result from a band-with presentation of visual
force feedback.88 The feedback signal used by Horeman
et al. is a vector displaying the direction of the force and
the amount of force used.20,78 This lead to a 60% reduc-
tion of the used force and resulted in improved tissue-
handling skills compared with visual feedback of the
time progressed.78 Besides real-time feedback, post-test
feedback of force parameters has also been found to
elicit a signiﬁcant improvement of the interaction forces
during the knot-tying face of suturing, whereas the effect
of training without any feedback did not improve force
use.12 A simulator equipped with visual force feedback
signiﬁcantly improves precision and accuracy of force
application by combining real-time visual feedback after
practicing speciﬁcally designed tasks.10,24,83
Instead of visual feedback, Wottawa et al. have investi-
gated the effect of enhanced tactile feedback. BTs
already contain natural haptic feedbacks, therefore the
tactile feedback signal consisted of an enhanced sensa-
tion transmitted to the handle grip using a specially
designed
laparoscopic
grasper.
The
supplementary
haptic feedback resulted in lower grasp force for novi-
ces. Experts used a comparable amount of grasp force in
either setting.81
A safe grasp should not damage the tissue, but also
avoid tissue slipping. To directly compare visual and tac-
tual feedback, reaction times to tissue slippage have
been measured. The results of this study showed that
reaction times to upcoming tissue slippage were faster
using tactile than visual feedback.82 Further studies on
this subject comparing different methods of force feed-
back are currently lacking.
Similar to studies examining the training effect of hap-
tic feedback in VR trainers, the advantages of force feed-
back on learning or performance curves in BTs have
been investigated. In BTs, force parameters can be used
to create a learning curve.17 Direct visual feedback of
force interaction in box training was shown to signiﬁ-
cantly improve the learning curve of novices compared
to training without visual feedback when provided in a
real-time manner78 and after ﬁnishing the exercise.12
Comparison of Haptic Feedback Between
Simulators
Different simulators are used to train laparoscopic skills.
Besides box- and VR trainers, a third type of simulator,
an AR simulator, exists. In this type of system, the video
screen of the simulator shows real images overlaid with
graphical imagery to create an enhanced world around
the user and to direct the user. It combines the natural
haptic feedback of a box-trainer with the virtual sur-
roundings and objective measures of performance of a
VR simulator.85 Only a very limited amount of studies
has investigated AR simulators. One study has been
found on discriminating power of AR simulators. It
TABLE 6 (CONTINUED)
Article
Participants
Task
Dependent Measure
Results
N
Type
p Value
Suturing
- Grasp mean, maximum, integral, ﬁrst,
second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
- Grasp IQR
>0.05/<0.05**
- Cartesian forces mean, IQR
>0.05/<0.05**
- Cartesian forces maximum, integral, ﬁrst,
second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
Knot tying
- Grasp mean, maximum, integral, ﬁrst,
second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
- Grasp IQR
>0.05/>0.05**
- Cartesian forces mean, maximum, IQR,
integral, ﬁrst, second, third derivative
<0.05/<0.05**
p values in bold are signiﬁcant.
No = novices; I = intermediates; E = experts.
*Only the most relevant dependent measures have been used.
**Left hand/right hand
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
253
concludes that it is impossible to distinguish between
novices and experts on an AR trainer based on force
measurements alone during suturing.21
Lack of complete or natural haptic feedback is one of
the most important characteristics distinguishing VR
trainers from BTs. A comparison of these trainers could
clarify the importance of (natural) haptic feedback for
training laparoscopic skills. Several studies have aimed
to compare the different types of haptic feedback
employed by simulators.
A total of 7 studies have compared box and VR train-
ers.2,52,55,67,86-88 The results of these studies are dis-
played in Table 7. A total of 3 studies found results
favoring BTs.2,55,86 The exerted force, time used and
accuracy were signiﬁcantly worse in the virtual environ-
ment.86 Participants also performed better on a VR
trainer after having practiced on a BT ﬁrst, but not the
other way around if tasks required force application55
and
laparoscopic
suturing
skills
were
not
further
improved by training on a VR trainer after having trained
on a BT.2 A total of 3 studies found comparable results
for both types of trainers.52,67,87 Madan and Frantzides
found
no
signiﬁcant
differences
in
performance
scores.87 Balci et al. similarly report that objective struc-
tured assessment of technical skills scores are similar for
both types of simulation trainers.67 Both studies employ
VR trainers without haptic feedback. Hiemstra et al.
report that both a VR trainer supplied with additional
kinematic interactions and BTs were found to improve
economy of movement and speed when accomplishing
a task demanding complex force application.52 A study
by Zhang et al. showed that performance scores after
using a BT were signiﬁcantly higher than those after
using a VR trainer equipped with haptic feedback, but
that the same VR trainer induced a steeper learning
curve than a BT.88
AR trainers have been compared to VR trainers in 2
studies.85,89 Performance after training on either an AR
trainer or VR without haptic feedback did not differ sig-
niﬁcantly.89 Comparison of the learning curves on a VR
trainer and an AR trainer also did not indicate favorable
results for either trainer.89 An AR trainer, however, was
considered a more realistic and better training tool and
allowed more measurable parameters than a VR trainer
without haptic feedback.85
DISCUSSION
Haptic, force, and tactile feedback are important con-
cepts regarding laparoscopic surgery. The overall addi-
tional value of haptic feedback in VR trainers is
contradictory. Haptic feedback does seem to have a
small positive effect on training performances, which is
most signiﬁcant when performing more advanced tasks.
Studies on learning curves show that simulators with
haptic feedback accelerate ones learning and result in a
steadier upward trend than those without haptic feed-
back, speciﬁcally at the beginning of training. Disadvan-
tages of unnatural haptic feedback have furthermore
been acknowledged such as the additional friction
caused by a haptic interface device or unexpected move-
ments due to model errors during instrument environ-
ment
collisions.
Moreover,
the
beneﬁts
of
haptic
feedback for novice surgeons in the skill acquisition
phase of learning, whom simulation training is most
often aimed at, is questionable. Comparing simulators
with to simulators without haptic feedback, improve-
ments are often minor for novices practicing basic skills.
One of the reasons can be that creating perfect haptic
feedback from a virtual environment seems difﬁcult due
to the required response time and operating frequency.
Therefore it remains difﬁcult to truly show the value of
haptic feedback in complex laparoscopic tasks.
Concerning BTs, force parameters, especially when
combined with motion parameters, are able to provide
an objective rating of laparoscopic skills. Force feed-
back, moreover, improves training both when provided
real time and post training. The possibilities of AR train-
ers, which provide natural haptic feedback as well as a
more realistic environment, seem promising. The major-
ity of the studies compared the effects of VR and BTs
favor BTs over VR trainers. The results of AR and VR
trainers were comparable.
When interpreting these results, several limitations
must be considered. The most important limitation is
the large amount of variability between the studies.
Especially the studies concerning haptic interface devi-
ces are difﬁcult to compare to each other. Studies use
many different types of haptic interface devices, differ-
ent simulators with tasks varying in difﬁculty, subjects,
and outcome measures. The lack of universal outcome
measures is especially conspicuous since it prevents
direct comparison of the results of different studies. Sec-
ond, several items are investigated in only a limited num-
ber
of
studies.
The
effect
of
force
feedback
on
performance or learning curves for example is discussed
in only 3 studies. As a result, conclusive evidence is miss-
ing. Finally, the one outcome measure that is very often
used, time to complete a task, is often critically looked
upon. It would promote working fast instead of consci-
entious and is especially unsuitable to evaluate begin-
ners, who have not yet reached the autonomous
learning phase.77 This assumption is based on the theory
of learning a skill by Fitts and Posner.90 This theory sub-
divides the learning of a technical skill into 3 phases: the
cognitive, assimilation, and autonomy phase. When a
subject has not yet automated a certain skill, focussing
254
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
TABLE 7. Trainers With Natural Haptic Feedback Compared to VR Trainer with or Without Added Haptic Feedback
Article
Participants
Type of Simulator
Task
Outcome Measure
Conclusion
N
Type
Box
VR
p Value
Type
HF
Balci et al.67
16
No
Box
LapSim
Y
Laparoscopic cyst decortication
OSATS
Respect to tissue
0.64
Time and manipulation
0.50
Instrumental experience
0.50
Safety
1.00
Assistant use
1.00
Flow
0.23
Accuracy
0.38
Bell and Cao86
10
No
Box
Handshake
Y
Probing
Time to detection
<0.001
Maximum force application
<0.001
Error in detection
0.007
Botden et al.2
20
I
Box
SimSurgery
N
Suturing Knot tying
Summation of scores
Box vs control
0.298
VR vs control
0.772
Box vs VR
0.160
Chmarra et al.89
19
I
Box
SIMENDO
N
Balls task
Box + VR
Time/Path length/Depth perception
>0.05
Ring task
Box + VR
Time/Path length/ Depth perception
>0.05
Elastic band task
Box
Time/Path length/Depth perception
<0.001
VR
Time, Path length L/Depth perception L
>0.05
Path length R
<0.001
Depth perception R
<0.002
Hiemstra et al.52
50
No
Box I / Box II*
VRI: SIMENDO/ VR
II: SIMENDO**
I:N II:Y Rubber band task
Time
VRI/ VRII/BoxI/Box II
<0.005
Control
>0.05
Total path length
VRI/Control
>0.05
VR II/BoxI/BoxII
<0.005
Motion in depth
VRI/Control
>0.05
VRII/BoxII
<0.05
BoxI
<0.01
Madan and
Frantzides87
32
No
Box
MIST-VR
N
5 basic tasks (peg transfer/peg
placement/pipe cleaner/probe
through rings/rope)
Time/Error
>0.05
Zhang et al.88
21
No, I, E
Box
VBLaST
Y
FLS
Total score
<0.001
HF = haptic feedback; Box = box trainer; VR = virtual reality trainer; Y = yes; N = no.
*Box I: box trainer; Box II: box with kinematic interactions.
**VR I: SIMENDO, VR II: SIMENDO with kinematic interactions.
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
255
on fast times could lead to an increase of errors and
result the acquirement of incorrect techniques.91 There-
fore, time measurement might not be an appropriate
performance measure for novices and conclusions
should not be based on time scores alone.
Despite these limitations, this review provides an elab-
orate overview of the literature, which includes a great
number of studies on haptic and force sensing in simula-
tion. Convincing evidence is provided concerning the
beneﬁts of force parameters, force sensing and force
feedback. Reaching a univocal conclusion regarding hap-
tic feedback in VR training, on the other hand, is difﬁ-
cult. Many different studies and contradicting results
have been found throughout the literature concerning
this subject. Interestingly, the emergence of robotic sur-
gery could increase the popularity of VR trainers without
haptic feedback. Since robots lack haptic feedback, VR
trainers without a haptic interface device seem espe-
cially competent in teaching the skills necessary for this
speciﬁc procedure.
For future research, it would be interesting to inves-
tigate the clinical impact of haptic and force feedback.
This clinical impact is currently investigated on the
box or VR trainer, instead of in the OR. Moreover, con-
struct validity is often used to investigate the training
ability of simulators. Construct validity shows that the
simulator can be used to differentiate between differ-
ent levels of experience. However, the ability to apply
a skill in the operating room cannot be predicted with
construct validity alone. To evaluate the effect of a sim-
ulator on OR performance a different method should
be applied. For example, performance in the OR can
be compared after training in different settings. This
method has been previously applied to demonstrate
the beneﬁts of VR training.92-96 Studies compared VR
simulators without haptic or a comprehensive training
curriculum comprising of box and VR training to no
simulation training. Performance in the OR was signiﬁ-
cantly better after simulation training.92-97 It would be
interesting to apply this method to compare VR train-
ers with and without haptic feedback, BTs and AR
trainers in future research. It would further be interest-
ing to focus speciﬁcally on novice surgeons and evalu-
ate the optimal training curriculum for residents at the
beginning of their training.
CONCLUSION
The value of haptic and force feedback has been a sub-
ject of debate. Heterogeneity between and within stud-
ies
describing
the
subject
hinder
decision-making.
Haptic interface devices are required to endow VR
simulators with haptic feedback. The surplus value of
haptic feedback is inconclusive. Haptic feedback seems
more important when more complex tasks are per-
formed and can lead to an improved learning curve.
Improvements, however, are only minor and less pro-
nounced for novice surgeons. Force feedback in BTs has
been shown to be beneﬁcial both when provided real
time and postpractice compared with BTs without force
feedback. The use of force parameters, especially when
combined with motion parameters has been reported to
provide objective rating of laparoscopic skills.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
None.
FUNDING
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from
funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-
proﬁt sectors.
REFERENCES
1. Gallagher A, Ritter E, Champion H, et al. Virtual real-
ity simulation for the operating room. Ann Surg.
2005;241:364–372.
2. Botden SMBI, Torab F, Buzink SN, Jakimowicz JJ.
The importance of haptic feedback in laparoscopic
suturing training and the additive value of virtual
reality simulation. Surg Endosc Other Interv Tech.
2008;22:1214–1222.
3. Dankelman JGrimbergen C. Systems approach to
reduce
errors
in
surgery.
Surg
Endosc.
2005;19:1017–1021.
4. Rodrigues SP, Horeman T, Dankelman J, van den
Dobbelsteen JJ, Jansen F. Suturing intraabdominal
organs: when do we cause tissue damage? Surg
Endosc Other Interv Tech. 2012;26:1005–1009.
5. Botden S, Jakimowicz J. What is going on in aug-
mented reality simulation in laparoscopic surgery?
Surg Endosc. 2008;23:1693–1700.
6. Scott D, Cendan J, Pugh C, Minter R, Dunnington G,
Kozar R. The changing face of surgical education:
simulation as the new paradigm. J Surg Res.
2008;147:189–193.
7. Salkini MW, Doarn CR, Kiehl N, Broderick TJ, Dono-
van JF, Gaitonde K. The role of haptic feedback in
256
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
laparoscopic training using the LapMentor II. J
Endourol. 2010;24:99–102.
8. Cotin S, Delingette H, Clement J, Marescaux J,
Ayache N. Simulation active de chirurgie endoscopi-
que. RBM-News. 1997;19:167–172.
9. Str€om P, Hedman L, S€arna
 L, Kjellin A, Wredmark T,
Fell€ander-Tsai L. Early exposure to haptic feedback
enhances performance in surgical simulator training:
a prospective randomized crossover study in surgical
residents. Surg Endosc. 2006;20:1383–1388.
10. Bontreger R. The design of a haptic device for train-
ing and evaluating surgeon and novice laparoscopic
movement skills. All Theses. 2011: 1249.
11. Cao CGL, Zhou M, Jones DB, Schwaitzberg SD. Can
surgeons think and operate with haptics at the
same time? J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11:1564–
1569.
12. Rodrigues SP, Horeman T, Sam P, Dankelman J, van
den Dobbelsteen JJ, Jansen FW. Inﬂuence of visual
force feedback on tissue handling in minimally inva-
sive surgery. Br J Surg. 2014;101:1766–1773.
13. Tang CN, Tai CK, Ha JPY, Siu WT, Tsui KK, Li MKW.
Laparoscopy versus open left lateral segmentec-
tomy
for
recurrent
pyogenic
cholangitis.
Surg Endosc Other Interv Tech. 2005;19:1232–
1236.
14. Prasad MSR, Manivannan M, Chandramohan SM.
Effects of laparoscopic instrument and ﬁnger on
force perception: a ﬁrst step towards laparoscopic
force-skills training. Surg Endosc Other Interv Tech.
2015;29:1927–1943.
15. Hanna GB, Cresswell AB, Cuschieri A. Shadow
depth cues and endoscopic task performance. Arch
Surg. 2002;137:1166–1169.
16. Susmitha WK, Mathew G, Devasahayam SR, Pera-
kath B, Velusamy SK. Factors inﬂuencing forces dur-
ing laparoscopic pinching: towards the design of
virtual simulator. Int J Surgery. 2015;18:211–215.
17. Cundy TP, Thangaraj E, Raﬁi-Tari H, et al. Force-
sensing enhanced simulation environment (For-
Sense) for laparoscopic surgery training and assess-
ment. Surgery. 2015;157:723–731.
18. Horeman T, Rodrigues SP, Jansen F, Dankelman J,
van den Dobbelsteen JJ. Force measurement plat-
form for training and assessment of laparoscopic
skills.
Surg
Endosc
Other
Interv
Tech.
2010;24:3102–3108.
19. Horeman T, Rodrigues SP, van den Dobbelsteen JJ,
Jansen F-, Dankelman J. Visual force feedback in lap-
aroscopic training. Surg Endosc. 2011: 1–7.
20. Horeman T, Rodrigues SP, Jansen FW, Dankelman J,
van den Dobbelsteen JJ. Force parameters for skills
assessment in laparoscopy. IEEE Trans Haptic.
2012;5:312–322.
21. Ishii H, Uemura M, Matsuoka N, Tomikawa M,
Hashizume M, Takanishi A. Objective skill assess-
ment of laparoscopic surgery using a suture simula-
tor. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 2011;6:S101–
S102.
22. Jayaraman S, Trejos AL, Naish MD, Lyle A, Patel RV,
Schlachta CM. Toward construct validity for a novel
sensorized instrument-based minimally invasive sur-
gery simulation system. Surg Endosc Interv Tech.
2011;25:1439–1445.
23. Richards C, Rosen J, Hannaford B, Pellegrini C,
Sinanan M. Skill evaluation in minimally invasive sur-
gery using force/torque signatures. Surg Endosc.
2000;14:791–798.
24. Singapogu RB, Smith DE, Long LO, Burg TC, Pagano
CC, Burg KJL. Objective differentiation of force-
based laparoscopic skills using a novel haptic simu-
lator. J Surg Educ. 2012;69:766–773.
25. Trejos AL, Patel RV, Naish MD, Schlachta CM.
Design of a sensorized instrument for skills assess-
ment and training in minimally invasive surgery. In:
2008 2nd IEEE Ras & Embs International Confer-
ence on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics
(Biorob 2008), Vols 1 and 2; 2008. p. 682–687.
26. Basdogan C, Ho C, Srinivasan M. Virtual environ-
ments for medical training: graphical and haptic
simulation of laparoscopic common bile duct explo-
ration. IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron. 2001;6:269–
285.
27. Devarajan V, Scott D, Jones D, et al. Bimanual haptic
workstation for laparoscopic surgery simulation.
Stud Health Technol Inform. 2001;81:126–128.
28. Fung, TT. Computer-Based Assesment for Suturing
Task. 2013.
29. Lim Y, Deo D, Singh T, Jones D, S De. In situ mea-
surement and modeling of biomechanical response
of human cadaveric soft tissues for physics-based sur-
gical simulation. Surg Endosc. 2008;23:1298–1307.
30. Khan ZA, Bin Mansoor S, Ahmad MA, Malik MM.
Input devices for virtual surgical simulations: a
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
257
comparative study. In: 2013 16th International Multi
Topic Conference (Inmic); 2013. p. 189–194.
31. Maciel A, Liu Y, Ahn W, Singh TP, Dunnican W, De
S. Development of the VBLaST (TM): a virtual basic
laparoscopic skill trainer. Int J Med Rob Comput
Assisted Surg. 2008;4:131–138.
32. Shamsunder SC, Manivannan M. Haptic guided lapa-
roscopy simulation improves learning curve. Stud
Health Technol Inform. 2008;132:454–456.
33. Sankaranarayanan G, Adair JD, Halic T, et al. Valida-
tion of a novel laparoscopic adjustable gastric band
simulator. Surg Endosc Interv Tech. 2011;25:1012–
1018.
34. Ayache N, Cotin S, Delingette H, Clemente JM, Russ-
ier Y, Marescaux J. Simulation of endoscopic sur-
gery.
Minim
Invasive
Ther
Allied
Technol.
1998;7:71–77.
35. Basafa E, Sheikholeslami M, Mirbagheri A, Farah-
mand F, Vossoughi GR. Design and implementation
of series elastic actuators for a haptic laparoscopic
device. In: Conference Proceedings: Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medi-
cine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society. Annual Conference.,
2009; 2009. p. 6054–6057.
36. Baur C, Guzzoni D, Georg O. VIRGY: a virtual reality
and force feedback based endoscopic surgery simu-
lator. Stud Health Technol Inform. 1998;50:110–
116.
37. Ben-Ur E, Salisbury JK. Development of a 5-DOF
force feedback laparoscopic interface for simulation
and telesurgery. Digitization of the Battlespace V
and
Battleﬁeld
Biomedical
Technologies
Ii.
2000;4037:274-285.
38. Brown I, Mayooran Z, Seligman C, et al. Engineering
Design of a virtual reality simulator for gynaecologi-
cal endoscopy. In: Seventh Australian and New Zea-
land Intelligent Information Systems Conference;
2001.
39. Guiatni M, Abane A, Kheddar A. Modeling and
Instrumentation for position and torque control of a
4DOF force-feedback device. In: IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics;
2010.
40. Gopalakrishnan G, Devarajan V. StapSim: a virtual
reality-based stapling simulator for laparoscopic her-
niorrhaphy. Medicine Meets Virtual Reality 12:
Building a Better You: the Next Tools for Medical
Education, Diagnosis, and Care. 2004;98:111-113.
41. Hwang G, Rozenblit JW. Implementation of com-
puter-guided navigation in surgical training. In:
2013 20th Annual Ieee International Conference
and Workshops on the Engineering of Computer
Based Systems; 2013. p. 174–180.
42. Kim S, Ryu J, Lee W. Palpation simulator with stable
haptic feedback. Minim Invasive Ther Allied Tech-
nol. 2014;24:211–217.
43. K€uhnapfel U, Cakmak HK, Maa H. Endoscopic sur-
gery training using virtual reality and deformable tis-
sue simulation. Comput Graphics. 2000;24:671–682.
44. Mack IW, McMenemy K, Ferguson RS, Potts S, Dick
A. Measuring the forces applied to a virtual reality
laparoscopic
surgical
simulator
with
quantum
tunnelling composite sensors. In: In: Proceedings of
the First International Conference on Biomedical
Electronics and Devices; 2008. p. 29–34.
45. Mack IW, Potts S, McMenemy KR, Ferguson RS.
Adding tactile realism to a virtual reality laparo-
scopic
surgical
simulator
with
a
cost-effective
human interface device—art no. 60551T. In: Stereo-
scopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems XIII,
6055; 2006...
46. Mishra RK, Srikanth S. GENIE—an haptic interface
for simulation of laparoscopic surgery. In: In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2000 IEEE/RS International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems; 2000.
47. Rolfsson G, Nordgren A, Bindzau S, Hagstrom JP,
McLaughlin J, Thurfjell L. Training and assessment
of laparoscopic skills using a haptic simulator. Stud
Health Technol Inform. 2002;85:409–411.
48. Rozenblit J, Feng C, Riojas M, et al. The computer
assisted surgical trainer: design, models, and imple-
mentation. Soc Comput Simul Int. 2014;30:211–220.
49. Tseng CS, Lee YY, Chan YP, Wu SS, Chiu AW. A PC-
based surgical simulator for laparoscopic surgery.
Stud Health Technol Inform. 1998;50:155–160.
50. Villard P, Koenig N, Perrenot C, Perez M, Boshier P.
Toward a realistic simulation of organ dissection.
Stud Health Technol Inform. 2014;196:452–456.
51. Maass H, Chantier BB, Cakmak HK, Trantakis C,
Kuehnapfel UG. Fundamentals of force feedback
and application to a surgery simulator. Comput
Aided Surg. 2003;8:283–291.
258
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
52. Hiemstra E, Terveer E, Chmarra M, Dankelman J,
Jansen F. Virtual reality in laparoscopic skills train-
ing: is haptic feedback replaceable? Minim Invasive
Ther Allied Technol. 2011;20:179–184.
53. Kim HK, Rattner DW, Srinivasan MA. Virtual-reality-
based laparoscopic surgical training: the role of sim-
ulation ﬁdelity in haptic feedback. Comput Aided
Surg. 2004;9:227–234.
54. McKenna K, McMenemy K, Ferguson RS, Dick A,
Potts S. Enhancing the immersive reality of virtual
simulators for easily accessible laparoscopic surgical
training.
Eng
Real
Virtual
Real
2008.
2008;6804:680402.
55. Norkhairani AR, Zaman HB, Ahmad A. Simulation
for laparoscopy surgery with haptic element for
medical students in HUKM: a preliminary analysis.
Visual Inform. 2011;7066:125–138.
56. Singapogu RB, Sander ST, Burg TC, Cobb WS. Com-
parative study of haptic training versus visual train-
ing for kinesthetic navigation tasks. Med Meets
Virtual Real 16. 2008;132:469–471.
57. Sharma M, Horgan A. Comparison of fresh frozen
cadaver and virtual reality simulator as methods of
training for laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy. Colo-
rectal Dis. 2011;13:10.
58. Picod
G,
Jambon
AC,
Vinatier
D,
Dubois
P.
What
can
the
operator
actually
feel
when
performing a laparoscopy? Surg Endosc. 2005;19:
95–100.
59. Vapenstad C, Hofstad EF, Lango T, Marvik R,
Chmarra MK. Perceiving haptic feedback in virtual
reality simulators. Surg Endosc Other Interv Tech.
2013;27:2391–2397.
60. Vapenstad C, Hofstad EF, Bo LE, et al. Limitations
of haptic feedback devices on construct validity
of
the
LapSim((R))
virtual
reality
simulator.
Surg Endosc Other Interv Tech. 2013;27:1386–
1396.
61. Lamata P, Gomez EJ, Sanchez-Margallo FM, Lamata
F, Del Pozo F, Uson J. Tissue consistency perception
in laparoscopy to deﬁne the level of ﬁdelity in vir-
tual reality simulation. Surg Endosc Interv Tech.
2006;20:1368–1375.
62. Panait L, Akkary E, Bell RL, Roberts KE, Dudrick SJ,
Duffy AJ. The role of haptic feedback in laparo-
scopic
simulation
training.
J
Surg
Res.
2009;156:312–316.
63. Thompson JR, Leonard AC, Doarn CR, Roesch MJ,
Broderick TJ. Limited value of haptics in virtual real-
ity laparoscopic cholecystectomy training. Surg
Endosc. 2011;25:1107–1114.
64. Zhou M, Tse S, Derevianko A, Jones DB, Schwaitz-
berg SD, Cao CG. Effect of haptic feedback in lapa-
roscopic surgery skill acquisition. Surg Endosc.
2012;26:1128–1134.
65. Kim J, De S Srinivasan MA. Physically based hybrid
approach in real time surgical simulation with
force
feedback.
Stud
Health
Technol
Inform.
2003;94:158–164.
66. Ali MR, Mowery Y, Kaplan B, DeMaria EJ. Training
the novice in laparoscopy. Surg Endosc Other
Interv Tech. 2002;16:1732–1736.
67. Balci MBC, Tas T, Hazar AI, et al. Applicability and
effectiveness of virtual reality simulator training in
urologic surgery: a double-blind randomised study.
Nobel Med. 2014;10:66–71.
68. Prasad MSR, Maniyannan M, Manoharan G, Chanda-
mohan SM. Objective assessment of laparoscopic
force and psychomotor skills in a novel virutal
reality-based
haptic
simulator.
J
Surg
Educ.
2016;73:858–869.
69. Singapogu RB, Long LO, Smith DE, et al. Simulator-
based assessment of haptic surgical skill: a compara-
tive study. Surg Innov. 2015;22:183–188.
70. Peirs J, Clijnen J, Reynaerts D, Van Brussel H, Her-
ijgers P, Corteville B, Boone S. A micro optical force
sensor for force feedback during minimally invasive
robotic surgery. Sens Actuators, A. 2004;115:447–
455.
71. Puangmali P, Althoefer K, Seneviratne LD, Murphy
D, Dasgupta P. State-of-the-art in force and tactile
sensing for minimally invasive surgery. IEEE Sens J.
2008;8:371–381.
72. Rosen J, Hannaford B, Richards CG, Sinanan MN.
Markov modeling of minimally invasive surgery
based on tool/tissue interaction and force/torque
signatures for evaluating surgical skills. IEEE Trans
Biomed Eng. 2001;48:579–591.
73. Tholey G, Desai JP. A modular, automated laparo-
scopic grasper with three-dimensional force mea-
surement
capability.
In:
In
Robotics
and
Automation, 2007 IEEE International Conference
on. IEEE. p. 250–255.
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
259
74. Wee J, Brooks RJ, Looi T, Azzie G, Drake J, Gerstle
JT. Force-sensing sleeve for laparoscopic surgery. J
Med Devices. 2016;10:030946.
75. Horeman T, Dankelman J, Jansen FW, Van Den Dob-
belsteen JJ. Assessment of laparoscopic skills based
on force and motion parameters. IEEE Trans
Biomed Eng. 2014;61:805–813.
76. Horeman T, Sun S, Tuijthof GJM, Jansen FW, Meijer-
ink JWJHJ, Dankelman J. Design of a box trainer for
objective assessment of technical skills in single-
port surgery. J Surg Educ. 2015;72:606–617.
77. Trejos AL, Patel RV, Malthaner RA, Schlachta CM.
Development of force-based metrics for skills assess-
ment in minimally invasive surgery. Surg Endosc
Other Interv Tech. 2014;28:2106–2119.
78. Horeman T, van Delft F, Blikkendaal MD, Dankel-
man J, van den Dobbelsteen JJ, Jansen F. Learning
from visual force feedback in box trainers: tissue
manipulation in laparoscopic surgery. Surg Endosc
Other Interv Tech. 2014;28:1961–1970.
79. Lamata P, Gomez EJ, Lamata Hernandez F, Oltra Pas-
tor A, Miguel Sanchez-Margallo F, del Pozo Guerrero
F. Understanding perceptual boundaries in laparo-
scopic
surgery.
IEEE
Trans
Biomed
Eng.
2008;55:866–873.
80. Rodrigues SP, Horeman T, Dankelman J, van den
Dobbelsteen JJ, Jansen FW. Tying different knots:
what forces do we use? Surg Endosc Interv Tech.
2015;29:1982–1989.
81. Wottawa CR, Cohen JR, Fan RE, et al. The role of
tactile feedback in grip force during laparoscopic
training tasks. Surg Endosc Other Interv Tech.
2013;27:1111–1118.
82. Westebring-van der Putten EP, Lysen WW, Henssen
VD, et al. Tactile feedback exceeds visual feedback
to display tissue slippage in a laparoscopic grasper.
Medicine
Meets
Virtual
Reality
17—Nextmed:
Design for/the Well Being. 2009;142:420-425. (WAS
11) .
83. Singapogu RB, DuBose S, Long LO, et al. Salient hap-
tic skills trainer: initial validation of a novel simula-
tor for training force-based laparoscopic surgical
skills.
Surg
Endosc
Other
Interv
Tech.
2013;27:1653–1661.
84. Smit D, Spruit E, Dankelman J, Tuijthof G, Hamming
J, Horeman T. Improving training of laparoscopic
tissue
manipulation
skills
using
various
visual
force feedback types. Surg Endosc. 2017;31:299–
308.
85. Botden SM, Buzink SN, Schijven MP, Jakimowicz JJ.
Augmented versus virtual reality laparoscopic simu-
lation: what is the difference? A comparison of the
ProMIS augmented reality laparoscopic simulator
versus LapSim virtual reality laparoscopic simulator.
World J Surg. 2007;31:764–772.
86. Bell AK, Cao CGL. Effects of artiﬁcial force feedback
in laparoscopic surgery training simulators. In: 2007
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics; 2007. p. 564–568.
87. Madan AK, Frantzides CT. Substituting virtual reality
trainers for inanimate box trainers does not decrease
laparoscopic skills acquisition. JSLS. 2007;11:87–89.
88. Zhang L, Grosdemouge C, Arikatla VS, et al. The
added value of virtual reality technology and force
feedback for surgical training simulators. Work.
2012;41:2288–2292.
89. Chmarra MK, Dankelman J, van den Dobbelsteen JJ,
et al. Force feedback and basic laparoscopic skills.
Surg
Endosc.
2008;22:2140
https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00464-008-9937-5.
90. Kanumuri P, Ganai S, Wohaibi EM, Bush RW, Grow
DR, Seymour NE. Virtual reality and computer-
enhanced training devices equally improve laparo-
scopic surgical skill in novices. JSLS. 2008;12:219–
226.
91. Fitts Posner M. Human Performance. Belmont, Calif:
Brooks/Cole; 1967.
92. Beyer L, Troyer J, Mancini J, Bladou F, Berdah S, Kar-
senty G. Impact of laparoscopy simulator training
on the technical skills of future surgeons in the
operating room: a prospective study. Am J Surg.
2011;202:265–272.
93. Grantcharov T, Kristiansen V, Bendix J, Bardram L,
Rosenberg J, Funch-Jensen P. Randomized clinical
trial of virtual reality simulation for laparoscopic
skills training. Br J Surg. 2004;91:146–150.
94. Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, O’Brien MK,
Bansal VK, Andersen DK, Satava RM. Virtual reality
training improves operating room performance:
results of a randomized, double-blinded study. Ann
Surg. 2002;236:458–464.
95. Larsen C, Soerensen J, Grantcharov T, et al. Effect of
virtual reality training on laparoscopic surgery:
260
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;338. b1802-
b1802.
96. Kundhal P, Grantcharov T. Psychomotor perfor-
mance measured in a virtual environment correlates
with technical skills in the operating room. Surg
Endosc. 2008;23:645–649.
97. Shore EM, Grantcharov TP, Husslein H, Shirreff L,
Dedy NJ, McDermott CD, Lefebvre GG. Validating a
standardized laparoscopy curriculum for gynaecol-
ogy residents: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2016;215:e1–e11.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Supplementary material associated with this article can
be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.
jsurg.2018.06.008.
Journal of Surgical Education  Volume 76 /Number 1  January/February 2019
261
