Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Current Problems in Surgery 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cpsurg 
Surgical Simulation: Virtual Reality to 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
Elijah W. Riddle, MD a , Divya Kewalramani, MD b , 
Mayur Narayan, MD, MPH, MBA b , Daniel B. Jones, MD, MS a , ∗
Introduction 
“See one, do one, teach one ” is an adage no longer applicable to most modern academic med- 
ical centers which have embraced instead the idea of “perfect practice makes perfect.” It is no 
longer acceptable to use patients to practice on to learn to throw your ﬁrst endostitch or create 
your ﬁrst stapled anastomosis. These skills should be practiced and mastered in a basic skills lab 
or a comprehensive simulation center and then brought to the bedside to provide quality care 
as part of a team. 
Simulation was once novel and is now commonplace. After a simulation lecture to Boston 
Surgical in 2005, the chairmen of surgery at Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) and Mas- 
sachusetts General Hospital (MGH) challenged whether we needed to change an educational 
process that was not broken. Drs. Zinner and Warshaw were correct that simulation was expen- 
sive, required space, and took trainees out of the operating theaters. 
By 2009 when Current Problems in Surgery published “Surgical Skill Training and Simulation,”1 
all Boston teaching hospitals were fully engaged in simulation training, innovation, and educa- 
tion research. That issue outlined the transition from learning on patients and using vivarium 
and cadaver labs to using video trainers and simulation. We showed how training on simulators 
improved operative performance of surgical residents performing a laparoscopic hernia repair 
( Fig 1 ) 2 and LC ( Fig 2 ). 3 In this issue of Current Problems in Surgery , we highlight advances in 
simulation over the last 25 years. 
Since 2009, the American College of Surgeons (ACS) Accredited Education Institutes (AEI) 
have grown from 27 to more than a hundred accredited centers worldwide as more medical 
From the a Department of Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ; and b Department of Surgery, Rutgers 
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 
∗Address reprint requests to Daniel B. Jones , MD, MS , Department of Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, 185 
South Orange Avenue, Medical Sciences Building, G-506, Newark, NJ 07103. 
E-mail address: daniel.jones@njms.rutgers.edu (D.B. Jones). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpsurg.2024.101625 
0011-3840/© 2024 Published by Elsevier Inc. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
2 
Fig. 1. Laparoscopic hernia model. 
Fig. 2. Virtual reality (VR) laparoscopic cholecystectomy: (A) retraction of gallbladder, (B) clip cystic duct. 
3 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Fig. 3. Team training using simulation scenarios. (A) Control room. (B) Debrief. 
schools and training programs invest in simulation centers and adopt skills-based training and 
team training. The Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) and Fundamentals of Endoscopic 
Surgery (FES) are required by the American Board of Surgery (ABS) before taking the general 
surgery qualifying examination. Gynecology also requires FLS. The Association for Surgical Ed- 
ucation (ASE) and Association of Program Directors in Surgery (APDS) have popularized their 
curricula for medical students and residents, respectively. 
Simulation technology has quickly evolved from early box trainers to more and more realistic 
virtual reality (VR) simulators. 4 , 5 This is particularly true for VR simulators to teach robotic skills 
and operations such as robotic ventral and inguinal hernia. 
With experience, simulators achieved higher realism with scenarios. Team interactions and 
performance were being measured. Inspired by the work of Lord Ara Darzi and colleagues at 
Imperial College, London, Dan Jones built the ﬁrst mock endosuite in 2006 at the Carl J. Shapiro 
Simulation and Skills Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. The endosuite includes 
multiple camera mountings, directional microphones, and sophisticated data management to 
record all communication and activity during a laparoscopic simulation. A separate control room 
with video monitors overlooked the simulation via a 1-way mirror. After simulation scenarios, 
video clips are reviewed and discussed in the Debrief Room ( Fig 3 ). Seasoned surgeons could be 
compared to younger surgeons. 6 , 7 Atul Gawande successfully lobbied CRICO, the Harvard mal- 
practice carrier, to fund all surgeons to experience “OR Team Training with Simulation” across 
the Harvard teaching hospitals (Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center [BIDMC], MGH and BWH, 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
4 
and Children’s Hospital). The curriculum emphasized closed loop communication, speaking up, 
and the use of checklists. 8 Ten years later, malpractice cases related to poor communication have 
trended down. Nevertheless, many wondered whether team training might be better taught with 
VR. 9 
The challenge for engineers was whether they could create a virtual operating room (OR) as 
a safe place to make errors and learn as individuals and as teams. Suvranu De at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute and Dan Jones at BIDMC created a VR OR. 10 The surgeons wore an Oculus 
headset and could interact through an avatar with the virtual OR. The ﬁrst study measured the 
response of surgeons, anesthesiologists, and nurses to an OR ﬁre. 11 Less than 5% of the OR team 
responded appropriately and turned off the oxygen from the ventilator. After repetition in the 
VR OR, most learned the correct steps. For those who struggled, the simulator guided the avatar 
to make the correct, safe choice, thereby using artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) guidance to help in 
decision making in crisis. 
Most recently, we have used the virtual OR to better understand surgeon behavior. At the So- 
ciety of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) annual conference in 2024, 
participants wore an Oculus Headset with audio. The participant was engaged with 3 other con- 
federate avatars during an acute hemorrhage scenario during laparoscopy. During the crisis, the 
other 3 avatars introduced verbal microaggressions during the operative procedure. Afterwards, 
the participant surgeons were asked about what they heard and did, or more commonly did not 
do, to address microaggressions. We were now able to use the safe space of VR OR to teach 
professionalism. 
As we use multi-avatar simulation platforms, it is likely that AI will learn how we think as 
individuals and as teams. AI will not only help us get to the right answer, AI will help us do the 
right thing. Embracing technology has the potential of improving patient safety. Herein, we again 
restate the importance of training surgeons using simulation for both technical and nontechni- 
cal skills. We update the exciting advances in simulation over the last 16 years since our last 
publication in Current Problems in Surgery , such as VR 10 , AI 11 and 3-D printing. 12 We reimagine 
the future with the virtual mock OR and role of AI in decision making in crisis scenarios. 
Credentialing of programs and surgeons 
The ACS established the accreditation of simulation centers in 2005. The key elements re- 
quired are space, faculty, personnel, budget, innovation, and the use of adult education theory 
and feedback. By 2009, 27 simulation centers were accredited. Today nearly 100 centers are 
accredited comprehensive simulation centers. However, many others are signiﬁcantly under- 
resourced by medical schools and hospitals. 
The ability of simulation to enhance surgical education and improve patient outcomes has 
been repeatedly demonstrated over time. As a result, simulation is now formally required for ac- 
creditation of surgical training programs and credentialing of surgeons. The Accreditation Coun- 
cil for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) explicitly requires simulation facilities, experiences, 
and/or administrative resources for many procedural specialties. For general surgery, the ACGME 
Program Requirements 13 state that “programs must provide for simulation and skills labora- 
tories.” Furthermore, they require personnel for administration of simulation, “a level-speciﬁc, 
simulation-based curriculum that complements clinical rotations in the development of techni- 
cal and nontechnical skills,” and a designated “individual to manage the portfolio of simulation 
activities.” For obstetrics and gynecology, the ACGME requires “space and equipment for the ed- 
ucational program including...access to simulation resources” and includes “simulation training”
among the required “structured and regularly held” educational sessions. 14 The ACGME requires 
simulation facilities for other procedural specialties, with the orthopedic surgery requirements 
including “a dedicated space to facilitate basic surgical skills training,”15 and plastic surgery re- 
quirements stating that plastic surgery “programs must provide for skills laboratories.”16 The 
ACGME also requires that residents in an anesthesiology training program “must participate in 
5 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
at least one simulated clinical experience each year.”17 These explicit program requirements en- 
sure simulation is universally available to trainees in these specialties. 
Simulation has also been formally included in the certiﬁcation process for individual sur- 
geons. Beginning in 2010, the ABS has required successful completion of several programs that 
utilize simulation-based training and assessment, namely Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery 
(FLS), Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), and Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS), for ap- 
plicants to attain eligibility for the general surgery qualifying examination. 18 In 2014, the ABS in- 
troduced their Flexible Endoscopy Curriculum for General Surgery Residents, which culminates 
with certiﬁcation in the simulation-based Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES). Starting 
from the 2017-2018 academic year, FES certiﬁcation was added to the certiﬁcations listed above 
as requirements for eligibility for the qualifying examination. The American Board of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology (ABOG) has required certiﬁcation in FLS for its board certiﬁcation for residents 
graduating after May 31, 2020. As of now, the ABS does not require any simulation-based as- 
sessment for its Continuous Certiﬁcation process. However, there may be a role in the future for 
simulation-based assessment for maintenance of certiﬁcation, although it would require devel- 
opment of standardized, validated assessment instruments. Beyond board certiﬁcation, creden- 
tialing of individual surgeons to perform procedures usually occurs at the facility level. 
Credentialing requirements often include board certiﬁcation, which incorporates the 
simulation-based assessments for surgeons who completed training after their respective boards 
added those requirements. Because these simulation-based assessments may be the only objec- 
tive measures of a surgeon’s knowledge and skill within the respective practice domain, some 
have advocated for their use in credentialing for all surgeons who perform relevant procedures. 
In 2012, the ACS and SAGES issued a joint statement recommending FLS certiﬁcation as an in- 
stitutional credentialing requirement for all surgeons who perform laparoscopic surgery. 19 
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
Surgical simulation and the COVID-19 pandemic 
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic impacted essentially every aspect of 
medical care and training around the world. Like many other domains, surgical simulation expe- 
rienced an initial cessation of activities as resources were diverted to acute clinical care and sys- 
tems were put in place to assure participants’ safety. However, although many routine simulation 
activities were canceled or postponed, simulation featured prominently within the pandemic’s 
rapidly evolving clinical environment to hone newly developed protocols and procedures. Ulti- 
mately, through resumption of traditional simulation activities and development of new, often 
virtual, opportunities, simulation played a major role in the maintenance of skill throughout the 
pandemic period and overcoming the gap in clinical volume for residents and students whose 
training was interrupted by the pandemic. 
At the onset of the pandemic in early 2020, many groups paused simulation and assessment 
activities in the face of social distancing requirements, personnel scheduling adjustments, and 
various unknowns related to disease transmission and health care system needs. SAGES closed 
FLS, FES, and Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) test centers from March 27, 2020, 
through May 31, 2020. On reopening of test centers in June 2020, they noted that local restric- 
tions might still impact test center availability and offered remote testing options for institutions 
to administer the examinations at their own facilities. Recognizing the potential diﬃculty of ob- 
taining those certiﬁcations, the ABS relaxed the requirements for their qualifying and certifying 
examinations in 2020 and 2021, allowing residents completing training in those years to take 
1 or both exams without ﬁrst receiving FLS and/or FES certiﬁcation. However, applicants were 
still required to complete those certiﬁcations to achieve ﬁnal board certiﬁcation by the ABS. The 
ACS Committee on Trauma (CoT), recognizing the challenges of scheduling ATLS renewal courses 
amid the pandemic, offered extensions on ATLS certiﬁcations. Initially, they extended the certiﬁ- 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
6 
cation through 2020 for providers whose certiﬁcation expired in late 2019 and who remained in 
the grace period and for 1 additional year for those expiring in 2020. Ultimately, they granted 
certiﬁcation extensions into 2023 for ATLS students who took a mandatory content review and 
for ATLS faculty. 
The ACS Division of Education appointed a special committee through the Academy of Master 
Surgeon Educators in March of 2020 to evaluate the impact of and response to the pandemic for 
surgical training. The committee conducted a survey of surgery chairs, program directors, and 
Academy members from April to June of 2020. The results showed that surgical simulation was 
signiﬁcantly impacted early in the pandemic, with 44% of respondents reporting that simulation 
centers were not accessible and 53% of respondents reporting suspension of simulation training. 
At the same time, simulation emerged as a key theme among innovations implemented in re- 
sponse to the pandemic. 20 The special committee also conducted surveys of surgery clerkship 
directors in the spring of 2020 and 2021. Regarding access to simulation training, 42% of clerk- 
ship directors who responded to that item on the 2021 survey noted a negative impact of the 
pandemic whereas 49% reported no impact. However, virtual adaptation of simulation and skills 
training was the most-cited educational adaptation by clerkship directors. 21 
Adaptation of simulation programs during the pandemic 
As the pandemic progressed, surgical educators recognized the need to adapt traditional sim- 
ulation methods to provide surgical skills training across all levels of experience, especially con- 
sidering the decreased operative volume impacting the training of many fellows, residents, and 
students. Many programs successfully employed virtual curricula, remote simulation activities, 
and telesimulation to achieve their learning objectives. 
Quaranto and colleagues described their successful initiative to utilize increasingly ubiqui- 
tous video-conferencing equipment to deliver basic suturing and knot-tying simulation training 
to surgery clerkship students who were at home during June and July 2020, early in the pan- 
demic. 22 They used their institution’s video-conferencing vendor, Zoom. In addition to the usual 
third-person view from a laptop or webcam, they added a high-resolution camera mounted from 
the instructor’s ﬁrst-person view to allow optimal demonstration of the tasks. They also utilized 
a cost-effective, slightly modiﬁed, open source, 3D printed phone dock to allow each student to 
share their ﬁrst-person view with the instructor during the simulation sessions. Notably, they 
reported a minimal upload bandwidth of 4 Mbps and latency of 70 msec to maintain the video 
transmission during the session. Each student received a standardized surgical equipment pack 
that included the 3D printed phone mount, a suture practice pad, a needle driver, forceps, scis- 
sors, a 2-color shoelace, two 12-packs of 2-0 silk ties, two 2-0 silk sutures on an SH needle, two 
4-0 Prolene sutures, and two 4-0 Monocryl sutures. The course consisted of 3 sessions—an in- 
troduction to remote surgical skills simulation and review of the instruments, a session focused 
on knot tying where students tied knots on the handle of a mug, and a ﬁnal session focused 
on suturing. In each session, the instructor ﬁrst demonstrated the technique and then answered 
questions and provided feedback, including speciﬁc instruction for individual students using the 
ﬁrst-person camera dock. The sessions were deemed successful as all students were reported to 
have visually demonstrated completion of the knot tying and suturing tasks. Students aggregate 
conﬁdence scores improved from presurvey to postsurvey for knot tying and suturing. Finally, 
qualitative feedback from the students highlighted the effectiveness of the ﬁrst-person camera 
view for the instructors and trainees for a remote simulation session. 
Tellez and colleagues reported their experience with the addition of virtual instruction of ba- 
sic knot tying and suturing tasks for an intern boot camp in the setting of restrictions imposed 
by the COVID-19 pandemic in June 2020. 23 They compared the 2020 cohort to the 2019 cohort, 
which participated in a traditional 1-week in-person boot camp. Both cohorts received instruc- 
tion on 12 tasks ( Table 1 ), had opportunities for voluntary one-on-one tutoring, completed test- 
ing at the end of the boot camp period, and received ongoing one-on-one coaching until achiev- 
ing proﬁciency in the tasks. The 2019 in-person cohort was introduced to the skills during a 
7 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Table 1 
Intern curriculum tasks. 
Task 
Description 
1 
Palm needle driver 
2 
Knot tying, No tension, 2-Handed 
3 
Knot tying, No Tension, 1-Handed 
4 
Knot tying, Under tension, 2-Handed, Surgeon’s knot 
5 
Knot tying, Under tension, 2-Handed, Slip knot 
6 
Knot tying, Under tension, 1-Handed, Slip knot 
7 
Suturing, Interrupted, Simple 
8 
Suturing, Interrupted, Horizontal mattress 
9 
Suturing, Interrupted, Vertical mattress 
10 
Suturing, Running, Simple 
11 
Suturing, Running, Subcuticular 
12 
Suturing, Interrupted, Subcuticular 
1-hour session at the beginning of the boot camp week. They were provided with instructional 
videos of the tasks previously recorded by Scott and colleagues, who validated the curriculum. 
Over the week, they had 4 more hours of practice with faculty, access to the simulation center 
for independent practice, and voluntary one-on-one tutoring sessions with the faculty simulation 
director. However, no interns participated in the one-on-one tutoring. Due to pandemic related 
restrictions on in-person activities, the 2020 boot camp was reduced to one half of the 2019 
sessions and additional sessions were conducted via Zoom over the entire month. The incoming 
interns received knot tying and suturing practice materials at home. The curriculum was intro- 
duced in 3 one-hour sessions, and participants were given instructional videos, newly recorded 
since the prior year, after each session. Three virtual tutoring sessions with a 1:4 faculty-to- 
intern ratio were held before the truncated in-person boot camp. The interns were again offered 
one-on-one tutoring during the boot camp period, and 9 interns accepted the offer for in-person, 
socially distanced tutoring while 9 interns accepted the offer for virtual tutoring. 
The performance of the 2020 cohort was markedly improved compared to the 2019 cohort. 
In 2019, no residents achieved proﬁciency in all tasks at the boot camp post-test, and only 5.7% 
of tasks tested across all interns (18 out of 312) were scored as proﬁcient. In contrast, in 2020, 
8 residents (27.6%) attained proﬁciency in all tasks and 86.8% (302 out of 348) of tasks tested 
across all interns were scored as proﬁcient. The 2020 cohort demonstrated statistically signif- 
icant decreased time to completion and increased score for all tasks compared to the 2019 
cohort. Finally, in 2019 the faculty simulation director spent 55.5 hours providing one-on-one 
coaching with interns after the posttest, resulting in 64% of tasks rated as proﬁcient by Novem- 
ber. In 2020, the director spent 18 hours providing one-on-one coaching after the post-test, re- 
sulting in 92% of tasks rated as proﬁcient by September. The authors note that the virtual format 
was effective in helping the interns achieve proﬁciency in the curriculum’s tasks. However, they 
acknowledge that other factors, including the provision of practice materials at home, extension 
of the practice period in the month before clinical duties began, and new instructional videos, 
likely contributed to improved performance in 2020. Additionally, they report the possibility of 
a “COVID effect,” in which limitations on travel and in-person gatherings may have resulted in 
more time devoted to training compared to other activities in the month before starting the 
intern year. Regardless, given the marked improvement in performance, the authors planned to 
continue the 2020 curriculum with preboot camp virtual sessions in 2021 and likely beyond. 
Chan and colleagues reported development of a virtual technical skills course for senior lung 
transplantation fellows to attempt to minimize skill decay during the clinical slowdown at the 
start of the pandemic. 24 The Toronto Lung Transplant Program suspended transplantation ac- 
tivity, except for a select few acutely ill patients, for months during the early period of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. They ultimately performed only 12 lung transplants in a period that saw 
50 lung transplants in 2019. During that period, 7 fellows were provided a set of equipment and 
supplies at home that included a long-shafted Castroviejo needle driver, forceps, a novel stand 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
8 
with clips to mount the simulated tissue, rubber balloons to simulate the thin-walled pulmonary 
artery and left atrium, and 5-0 Prolene sutures. Teaching sessions were held twice weekly for 
3 months via Microsoft Teams video conferencing platform. The model could be adapted to 
simulate various technical challenges encountered during lung transplantation, including donor- 
recipient vessel size mismatch, short vessel cuffs, and speciﬁc suture methods for the left atrial 
cuff. During each session, volunteer fellows performed an anastomosis on camera with real time 
faculty commentary on their technique and advice on dealing with challenges in the real clini- 
cal setting. Each fellow also recorded an attempt at the anastomosis on a mobile phone, which 
was sent to a staff surgeon for a private critique with advice on deﬁciencies and suggestions for 
improvement. With permission of the individual fellows, some videos were also shown at the 
teleconference for group review. In addition to the virtual technical skills sessions, the fellows 
also had a series of virtual didactic and discussion sessions focused on practical aspects of lung 
transplantation. 
Twelve total sessions were held during the 3-month period. Participating fellows had an aver- 
age of 13.9 years from medical school graduation before starting lung transplant fellowship and 
had performed an average of 25.9 lung transplant cases before the pandemic. Fellows reported 
spending an average of 5 hours (range, 1.3-15 hours) practicing at home. Five out of 7 fellows 
reported self-described improvement in technical skills after participation in the curriculum and 
5 out of 7 reported improved conﬁdence in performing a lung transplant when clinical activ- 
ities resumed. Feedback from the fellows was mostly positive, including reporting that review 
of individual videos was useful, that having equipment for independent practice was valuable, 
and that the regular meetings provided motivation for continued practice. The fellows felt that 
the simulation model was not particularly realistic, particularly noting the difference in behav- 
ior of the balloon and an actual pulmonary artery, but they still felt the model was useful. The 
program evaluated the warm ischemic time for participating fellows’ 5 most recent cases before 
the pandemic and ﬁrst 5 cases on return from the pandemic. Among all fellows, they found no 
statistically signiﬁcant difference in warm ischemic time after the pandemic, although 1 fellow 
had an individual statistically signiﬁcant improvement in warm ischemic time, from 86.6 min- 
utes to 63 minutes ( P = 0.05 ). Overall, the authors found that the curriculum of virtual technical 
skills teaching, independent practice with a simulation model, individual video review, and vir- 
tual discussions helped senior trainees maintain their technical skills in a complex procedure 
during an unexpected cessation of clinical activities. 
Greenberg and colleagues adapted an in-person hands-on training course on incisional her- 
nia repair for practicing surgeons to a virtual at-home format, the Hernia@Home course, during 
the pandemic. 25 The virtual course was part of SAGES year-long ADOPT (Acquisition of Data for 
Outcomes and Procedure Transfer) method, replacing the in-person course that normally would 
have taken place at the SAGES annual meeting. Aside from the conversion to a virtual format for 
the hands-on portion of the course, the remainder of the course followed SAGES’ usual ADOPT 
format, including expert faculty trained in the Laparoscopic Colectomy Train the Trainer (Lapco 
TT) course, precourse lectures and videos, a precourse virtual meeting to set learning objectives, 
and monthly webinars for a year after the virtual hands-on session. The course organizers chose 
an existing telementoring platform from Proximie Ltd, which uses an augmented reality inter- 
face allowing real-time shared viewing of the camera view and telestration from the mentor. The 
organizers planned to use a human cadaveric model in the in-person hands-on course to teach 
tissue-based inguinal hernia repair and anterior and posterior component separation techniques 
for ventral hernia repair. With conversion to a virtual format, they chose to focus on component 
separation for ventral hernia repair and worked with KindHeart, a company that builds porcine 
surgical models, to develop a porcine abdominal wall model and tailored trainer box to house 
the model. The custom trainer box, mesh, and suture were shipped to participants in the week 
before the course. The porcine abdominal wall model, which was vacuum sealed in preserva- 
tive and frozen, was shipped to participants 2 days before the course. Learners supplied their 
own surgical instruments. On the day of the course, learners set up their own trainer boxes, ab- 
dominal wall models, and webcams. The virtual course was conducted in trios of 1 faculty and 2 
learners, with each learner having a chance to be virtually mentored in the operative procedures 
9 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
via audible and telestrated feedback from the faculty and a chance to observe the other learner’s 
operative session. 
Fifteen learners and 8 faculty members participated in the virtual hands-on session, which 
lasted from 38 to 190 minutes. A majority of course participants were able to set up the model 
and webcam without diﬃculty, but 2 surgeons required assistance from Proximie personnel on 
the day of the session. Logistical challenges reported by the participants included lighting and 
camera positioning (21%), issues logging into the platform (21%), diﬃculty coordinating sched- 
ules due to clinical responsibilities (21%), and diﬃculty obtaining instruments (7%). All attendees 
felt the porcine model was valuable for the learning experience and all but one felt the telemen- 
toring platform was valuable. All attendees reported that the virtual format allowed them to 
achieve their personal learning objectives and that the session was relevant to their professional 
development. Ten of the course participants had previously participated in in-person courses. 
They felt the virtual format was similar or even offered advantages compared to an in-person 
course, including lack of travel, fewer participants per model, and increased time with the fac- 
ulty mentor. The organizers noted a few drawbacks, including that the virtual course was expen- 
sive due to the cost of developing and shipping the operative model, that they were unable to 
ship models to participants outside the United States, and that the course required more logistic 
coordination than a course offered at a single site. They believed their model for a success- 
ful virtual hands-on course could promote continued operative professional development during 
the pandemic and could persist beyond the pandemic to allow training options for surgeons 
with travel and time restrictions in the future. 
Surgical simulation changed and adapted in signiﬁcant ways during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
many of which will carry forward into the future. This was exempliﬁed by a panel discussion 
at the 2024 Association of Surgical Education annual meeting titled “Remote Skills Training: It’s 
Here to Stay.” Although surgical simulation fundamentally changed in many ways during the 
pandemic, it remains a core element of surgical training, even taking on increased importance in 
light of the loss of operative experience by trainees. The special committee of the ACS Academy 
of Master Surgeon Educators conducted a follow-up survey of leaders in surgical education on 
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that was distributed between June and August 2021. 26 
Overall, although programs experienced lingering effects of the pandemic on surgical education, 
they reported less disruption of educational activities, restoration of clinical activity, adaptation 
of curriculum delivery, and improvement in trainee well-being compared to 2020. Almost all 
programs had transitioned educational conferences to a virtual format, but only a small percent- 
age transitioned simulation to a virtual format and only approximately 40% reported in-person 
simulation activities during the 2020-2021 academic year. However, leaders noted that increas- 
ing simulation would be a key adjustment to remediate deﬁciencies in minimal case numbers 
and progression of operative autonomy. 
Use of simulation to respond to COVID-19 
Although routine surgical simulation activities and assessment slowed or stopped early in the 
pandemic, simulation resources were redeployed in many institutions to help understand and re- 
spond to the rapidly changing clinical environment. At one of the author’s institutions, the lead- 
ership of a recurring combined surgical and anesthesia in situ simulation program utilized that 
infrastructure to conduct simulations of patient transport and personal protective equipment use 
through the perioperative spectrum for COVID positive patients requiring emergency surgery. 
Orgill and colleagues described a “pop up” simulation that was developed and implemented in 
2 days to teach proper use of personal protective equipment, safe transport, and minimizing 
aerosols during intubation and extubation for anesthesia clinicians and technicians. 27 New sim- 
ulation models were developed to address the unique challenges of the pandemic. Gomez and 
colleagues described their development of a high-ﬁdelity aerosol-generating cough simulator 28 
(video link, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7FEDFz1NmBU , ( Fig 4 ). 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
10 
Fig. 4. Video link to coronavirus (COVID) model. 
They used polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, a bicycle pump valve, adapters, and a ball valve 
connected to airway circuit tubing. The tubing was connected to an endotracheal tube placed 
retrograde through the bronchus of a mannequin. They used a UV-visible product to coat the 
mannequin’s airway to simulate production of aerosolized particles. The total cost of the model 
was $108. Kravitz and colleagues developed a virtual reality (VR) training module for donning 
and doﬃng of personal protective equipment using the Oculus Quest that was administered from 
November 2020 to January 2021. 29 Participants who used the VR training module performed 
better, although not achieving statistical signiﬁcance, than a comparison group that completed 
an e-module with an instructional video and PowerPoint presentation. Creative utilization and 
rapid adaptation of preexisting simulation resources, as occurred in the COVID-19 pandemic, can 
be critical elements in the response to any new clinical challenge that may emerge in the future. 
The evolving landscape of surgical education 
The traditional apprenticeship model in surgical training, where trainees learn by observing 
and assisting experienced surgeons, has limitations, especially as surgical procedures become 
more complex. There is a growing need for structured and standardized training methods to 
ensure patient safety and objectively evaluate trainees’ performance. The rise of AI in surgical 
education has introduced more comprehensive, safe, and eﬃcient learning experiences. 30 
In a Delphi study done by the ACS, a group of experts stated that consensus that AI meth- 
ods and AI-enabled metrics have the potential to beneﬁt surgical education, including training 
(100%), assessment (97.5%), and feedback (100%) was reached. For risks with AI and metrics, the 
panel only approached consensus on loss of privacy (75%) and the impact of human biases on 
AI (70%). Notably, there was no consensus that failure to be interpretable (57.5%) and actionable 
(62.5%) are potential risks with AI for surgical education. 31 
Nontechnical training 
Nontechnical skills are increasingly recognized as critical components of surgical competence. 
These skills include communication, teamwork, leadership, decision-making, situational aware- 
ness, and patient note writing. Effective nontechnical training focuses on several areas: 
11 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Communication skills . Surgeons must communicate effectively with patients, families, and 
health care teams. Training programs incorporate role-playing, standardized patient interactions, 
and simulation-based exercises to enhance verbal and nonverbal communication skills. 
Teamwork and collaboration . The OR is a complex environment that requires seamless col- 
laboration among various professionals. Team-based training exercises, including crisis resource 
management simulations—a set of principles dealing with cognitive and interpersonal behaviors 
that contribute to optimal team performance—help to foster a culture of teamwork and mutual 
support. 
Leadership and decision-making . Surgeons often lead clinical teams and make critical de- 
cisions under pressure. Leadership training programs, mentorship, and scenario-based exercises 
develop these essential skills. 
Situational awareness . Recognizing and responding to changes in the surgical environment is 
crucial for patient safety. Simulation exercises and debrieﬁng sessions improve situational aware- 
ness and adaptive thinking. 
Patient notes writing skill . Accurate and comprehensive patient note writing is essential for 
ensuring continuity of care, effective communication among health care providers, and legal doc- 
umentation. Training programs emphasize the importance of thorough documentation, including 
preoperative assessments, operative details, postoperative care, and follow-up notes. Structured 
templates, feedback from experienced surgeons, and electronic health record (EHR) systems are 
used to enhance these skills. 
Interprofessional and multidisciplinary health professions training 
Modern surgical education emphasizes the importance of interprofessional and multidisci- 
plinary training. This approach prepares surgeons to work effectively within diverse health care 
teams, enhancing patient care and outcomes. 
Interprofessional education . Interprofessional education involves collaborative learning ex- 
periences where students from different health professions learn with, from, and about each 
other. This fosters mutual respect and understanding, leading to better team dynamics in clini- 
cal practice. 
Multidisciplinary team training . Surgical education programs increasingly integrate multi- 
disciplinary team training, involving surgeons, nurses, anesthetists, and other health care profes- 
sionals. Simulated OR scenarios and team-based problem-solving exercises enhance coordination 
and collaboration. 
Shared decision-making : Training programs emphasize the role of shared decision-making 
in patient care, encouraging surgeons to engage patients and their families in the treatment 
process. This holistic approach ensures that all perspectives are considered, leading to better- 
informed and more patient-centered care. 
Simulation 
Accreditation 
American College of Surgeons Accredited Education Institutes 
The ACS AEI program began in 2005 and has a stated goal to “promote patient safety by using 
simulation, to support the lifelong learning of surgeons, surgical trainees, and other healthcare 
professionals, to enhance access to contemporary surgery education, and to advance scholarship 
in simulation-based surgical education.” As of this writing, the ACS has accredited 94 compre- 
hensive or focused education institutes across 34 states and the District of Columbia and 10 
other countries ( Fig 5 ). Twenty of those sites offer AEI-accredited fellowship programs in sim- 
ulation. The accreditation program is managed by the ACS Division of Education. The accredi- 
tation process is rigorous to ensure accredited sites meet the program’s standards. To achieve 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
12 
Fig. 5. Seal of Accredited Education Institutes (AEI). 
Fig. 6. First multiuser video trainer at University of Texas Southwestern in Dallas, Texas. 
accreditation, prospective sites must complete an application process and site visit. Maintenance 
of accreditation requires annual reports and a re-accreditation process with site visits every 5 
years. 
The program’s standards, introduced in 2005, were updated in 2012 and again 2021. The 
standards 32 are organized into 5 categories with corresponding criteria. These include person- 
nel, governance and budget, learners and educational resources, educational methodology, and 
advancement of the ﬁeld. The personnel requirements ensure the institute has appropriate, qual- 
iﬁed leadership with protected time and suﬃcient administrative and support staff. The gover- 
nance and budget requirements ensure that the institute has a clear statement of purpose to 
inform its goals and programs, adequate budget and ongoing ﬁnancial support, appropriate or- 
ganizational structure, and an oversight committee that meets at least twice annually. The learn- 
ers and educational resources criteria ensure that the institute is accredited by an appropriate 
governing body (ie, Liaison Committee on Medical Education [LCME], ACGME) and provides ed- 
ucation to surgeons in practice and at least 3 other learner groups, which may include surgical 
residents, medical students, nurses, physicians or residents from other disciplines, allied health 
professionals, and parents and families ( Fig 6 ). The standards require Comprehensive Institutes 
to have at least 1200 square feet of space controlled by the institute and dedicated to education 
and training with up to 40 0 0 additional square feet available for education and training needs 
of learners as well as activities of administrative and support staff. Focused Institutes must have 
at least 800 contiguous square feet of space dedicated to learner education and training and be 
able to accommodate at least 6 learners at 1 time ( Fig 7 ). 
The institute must maintain an inventory of necessary devices and equipment for their 
planned curricula and have staff who can appropriately use them. The educational methodology 
criteria ensure the institutes are developing new curricula using a structured approach, select 
13 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Fig. 7. Floor plan for Carl J. Shapiro Simulation and Skills Center at Harvard University. 
appropriate methods and models to meet learning objectives, include cognitive, psychomotor, 
and affective domains in their scope of education, conduct assessment and evaluation of learn- 
ers, faculty, and programs, and provide faculty development. Finally, the advancement of the 
ﬁeld criteria requires institutes to conduct research or scholarly activities in simulation-based 
education, submit annual compliance reports, and engage with the consortium of ACS-Accredited 
Education Institutes. Each criterion in the 5 domains has explicit compliance measures evaluated 
for initial accreditation and monitored for maintenance of accreditation. 
Society for Simulation in Healthcare 
The Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH) also offers accreditation of simulation cen- 
ters 33 although without the speciﬁc focus on surgical simulation. The SSH accreditation website 
states that accreditation can improve quality of care, increase visibility, and enhance credibility 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
14 
Fig. 8. Insignia of the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) Fundamentals courses: 
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS), Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE), and Fundamentals of Endo- 
scopic Surgery (FES). 
for accredited programs. Like the ACS-AEI program, the SSH updated its accreditation standards 
in 2021. All programs seeking accreditation must meet the core standards. The core standards 
include criteria for mission and governance, program management, resource management, hu- 
man resources, program improvement, integrity, and expanding the ﬁeld. Programs must also 
meet standards in at least one of the areas of assessment, research, and/or teaching/education. 
Programs may also apply for accreditation in the areas of systems integration and fellowship. 
The SSH has 2 accreditation cycles per year and successful programs are granted accreditation 
for 5 years. 
Curricula 
The most successful and widely disseminated simulation curricula employ a combination of 
structured didactic materials and tailored simulation activities. Most are developed and imple- 
mented by major surgical societies that have the ﬁnancial and personnel resources to build com- 
plex curricula and keep them up to date. The following are some of the successful programs 
from the SAGES, ACS Division of Education and the Committee on Trauma, the ASE, and the 
APDS. 
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) 
SAGES has been and continues to be a leader in the development, implementation, and wide 
dissemination of simulation-based surgical training curricula and assessment. They launched the 
ﬁrst “Fundamentals” program, FLS, in 2004. FES followed in 2010 and FUSE launched in 2013 
( Fig 8 ). 
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) 
The FLS program was launched by SAGES in October 2004. 34 However, the idea for the course 
arose much earlier, around 1997, with the leaders of the SAGES Continuing Education Committee, 
Drs. Lee Swanstrom and Nathaniel Soper. They were inspired to create something akin to the 
ATLS course to teach core knowledge and skills for laparoscopy, which was becoming widely 
used but with wide variability in training programs and outcomes. The program was envisioned 
to include didactics, clinical judgment, and technical skills. For the technical skills portion, Dr. 
Gerald Fried was engaged to adapt the McGill Inanimate System for Training and Evaluation 
of Laparoscopic Skills (MISTELS) for the FLS program. The trainer that would become the FLS 
box was initially developed by Dr. Carl Westcott, who donated the intellectual property. The 
developers of the program wanted to ensure that the cognitive and technical skills assessments 
were structured and validated to create a meaningful certiﬁcation. 
For the cognitive examination, a psychometrician was engaged, and beta testing occurred at 8 
sites to validate the examination before widespread use. SAGES partnered with the ACS in 2005 
and formed a joint committee to oversee the FLS program. As noted previously, in 2008 the 
ABS mandated that all general surgery residents obtain FLS certiﬁcation to be eligible for the 
ABS qualifying examination. The ABOG implemented an FLS certiﬁcation requirement for new 
applicants in 2020. 
15 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Table 2 
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) modules. 
0 
Introduction 
1 
Laparoscopic equipment 
2 
Energy sources 
3 
Operating room setup 
4 
Patient selection/preoperative assessment 
5 
Anesthesia and patient positioning 
6 
Pneumoperitoneum establishment and trocar placement 
7 
Physiology of pneumoperitoneum 
8 
Exiting the abdomen 
9 
Current and diagnostic laparoscopic procedures 
10 
Biopsy 
11 
Laparoscopic suturing 
12 
Hemorrhage and hemostasis 
13 
Postoperative care and complications 
14 
Manual skills training 
ﬁnal review 
Fig. 9. Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) peg trainer task. 
The FLS curriculum is available via the SAGES online platform at https://www.sages.org/owls/ , 
in both English and Spanish. The comprehensive web-based didactic modules cover a range of 
subjects related to laparoscopy, shown in Table 2 . The modules also include detailed videos 
of the tasks required for the technical skills portion of the FLS examination. The proctored 
FLS assessment includes a computer-based, timed, multiple-choice examination and a manual 
skills evaluation. The cognitive examination tests understanding of the basic principles of la- 
paroscopy, focused on clinical application. The manual skills evaluation includes 5 tasks with 
task-speciﬁc completion criteria. The tasks include peg transfer ( Fig 9 ), precision cutting, ligat- 
ing loop, suturing with extracorporeal knot tying, and suturing with intracorporeal knot tying. 
Candidates achieving a passing score on the cognitive examination and manual skills examina- 
tion are granted certiﬁcation. 
The value of FLS certiﬁcation has been recognized for both trainees and surgeons in practice. 
A recent study by Higgins, Turbati, and Goldblatt matched data from the national FLS registry 
with Society for Improving Medical Professional Learning (SIMPL) evaluations of general surgery 
resident intraoperative performance from 2015 to 2021. 35 They found that residents required 
less supervision and had improved performance scores in laparoscopic operations performed af- 
ter they passed the FLS examination compared to operations performed before they passed the 
FLS examination. In 2005, the Controlled Risk Insurance Company of Harvard’s Risk Management 
Foundation (CRICO/RMF), the internal malpractice underwriter for 18 teaching hospitals, spon- 
sored FLS training for laparoscopic surgeons in practice and provided a malpractice premium 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
16 
rebate for those achieving certiﬁcation. 36 The joint SAGES and ACS committee for FLS issued a 
statement in 2012 recommending that all surgeons performing laparoscopy be certiﬁed in FLS. 
Telesimulation and teleproctoring 
Telesimulation, the use of telecommunication resources to conduct real-time simulation ac- 
tivities when the trainer and trainee are geographically separated, was ﬁrst described in 2010 
by Drs. Okrainec, Henao, and Azzie, a group of surgeons from the University of Toronto. 37 Sur- 
geons from the University of Toronto had traveled to Botswana in March 2007 to teach a 3- 
day in-person FLS course. Although the course participants showed notable improvement in 
the assessed laparoscopic skills after the course, only 10% of participants achieved FLS certiﬁ- 
cation. The concept of telesimulation arose from the perceived need for further guided practice 
for the surgeons in Botswana in the face of costly and time-consuming travel for the surgeons 
from Toronto. Dr. Okrainec and his colleagues developed a telesimulation setup in Botswana and 
Toronto and conducted a controlled trial to evaluate the effectiveness of teaching FLS skills using 
telesimulation. 
Dedicated telesimulation rooms were set up at the University of Botswana and University of 
Toronto. The setup included a laparoscopic trainer box with a camera connected directly to a 
display screen. The camera also connected to a laptop, allowing its use as a webcam. A second 
webcam at each site recorded an external view of the surgeon. The webcams and surgeons were 
connected by Skype. At each location, the instructor or trainee had a screen showing their own 
laparoscopic trainer box, a screen showing the collaborating surgeon’s trainer box, and a pro- 
jected image of the collaborating surgeon. The instructor and trainee communicated via laptop 
microphones and speakers. 
The participants in the study included 16 surgeons from Botswana, 13 practicing surgeons 
and 3 trainees. The group was split into 8 surgeons in a telesimulation group and 8 surgeons 
in a self-practice group. Each group received an FLS instructional DVD and a FLS simulator with 
the necessary instruments and supplies for the 5 FLS tasks: peg transfer, pattern cutting, lig- 
ating loop, extracorporeal knot tying, and intracorporeal knot tying. All participants were told 
to practice the FLS tasks for at least 2 hours per week for 8 weeks. The surgeons in the teles- 
imulation group had a weekly, 15-minute telesimulation session with a surgeon from Toronto. 
During those sessions, the surgeons in Botswana demonstrated as many tasks as possible and 
received focused instruction and demonstration of technique from the surgeon in Toronto. The 
sessions were scheduled at the end of the clinical day in Botswana, which was the morning 
in Toronto. After the 8 weeks of practice, 2 surgeons from Toronto traveled to Botswana for 
in-person, oﬃcial FLS certiﬁcation testing. The surgeons in the telesimulation group achieved 
signiﬁcantly higher scores on all FLS tasks except the ligating loop, which had higher scores in 
the telesimulation group but did not achieve statistical signiﬁcance. All 8 of the surgeons in the 
telesimulation group achieved FLS certiﬁcation at that time, compared to only 3 surgeons in the 
self-practice group. 
After the initial proof-of-concept with the FLS telesimulation project in Botswana, the Toronto 
group demonstrated the eﬃcacy of telesimulation at other sites, for other technical skills, and in 
collaboration with other specialties. In 2011, they partnered with pediatricians from Toronto to 
use telesimulation to teach intraosseous needle insertion for pediatric resuscitation to physicians 
in Botswana. 38 In 2013, they published a report of their successful efforts to teach FLS skills to 
surgeons in Colombia using telesimulation. 39 In 2016, they used their telesimulation platform 
to teach ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia to anesthesiologists at 10 hospitals in Ontario, 
Canada. 40 To expand on their use of telesimulation instruction, they demonstrated the feasi- 
bility of remote assessment to promote structured feedback in telesimulation 41 and for formal 
certiﬁcation in the FLS program. 42 
International Dissemination of Fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery (FLS) and the Global 
Laparoscopic Advancement Program 
SAGES has extended their reach internationally through translation of the FLS curriculum, 
expansion of training and testing sites, and recently, a new program called the Global Laparo- 
17 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Table 3 
Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES) modules. 
1 
Technology 
2 
Patient preparation 
3 
Sedation and analgesia 
4 
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy 
5 
Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy 
6 
Performing lower GI procedures 
7 
Small bowel 
8 
Diagnostic endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
9 
Hemostasis 
10 
Tissue removal 
11 
Enteral access 
12 
Endoscopic ultrasound 
13 
Advanced imaging 
scopic Advancement Program (GLAP). 43 The GLAP involves a collaboration between SAGES and 
a national surgical society or local government in another country. SAGES has a team of faculty 
experts which partners with local surgeon educators to teach the curriculum. The GLAP course 
includes 5 days of instruction on “train the trainer” techniques, laparoscopic skills, curriculum 
development, and outcomes and data reporting. Local educators and trainees participating in 
the course must complete virtual precourse education modules. Each site must develop a plan 
for GLAP implementation, including buy in from local hospitals, sustainability, timeline, and as- 
signed responsibilities. In addition to lectures, course participants spend 2 days operating with 
visiting faculty and local educators develop their own low-cost simulators. The program is in- 
tended to be a long-term, sustainable partnership between the local site and SAGES, with on- 
going data collection, outcomes reporting, mentorship, and progress reports. Tsai and colleagues 
reported their successful development of an ambulatory surgical center in Uganda via a partner- 
ship with a Ugandan surgeon and the Mount Sinai Department of Surgery in New York. 44 The 
local surgeon completed a minimally invasive surgery mini-fellowship and trained with the FLS 
program. The team then completed a weeklong in-person training with the Ugandan OR team, 
after which the surgeon performed laparoscopic cases with telementoring from the surgeons in 
the United States. From October 2021 to February 2024, the surgeon performed 37 laparoscopic 
appendectomies and 24 laparoscopic cholecystectomies with telementoring, with no intraopera- 
tive complications and only 2 superﬁcial wound infections noted on short-term follow-up. The 
GLAP aims to produce surgeons who can safely and independently perform laparoscopic surgery, 
create an enduring educational environment at the partner site, develop ongoing data collection 
and outcomes reporting to promote patient safety and quality, and empower host countries to 
independently maintain ongoing training programs with local faculty after the partnership with 
SAGES. 
Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES) 
The ﬁrst discussions about a standardized endoscopy curriculum were held at the 2005 
SAGES meeting, after which the FLS task force was created. 45 The task force had 2 subcom- 
mittees, 1 focused on the developing program’s didactic materials and 1 on creation of a plat- 
form for testing manual endoscopic skills. The program was oﬃcially launched in 2010. As with 
FLS, the program’s didactic materials are available via the SAGES organization wide learning sys- 
tem online. There are 13 didactic modules, outlined in Table 3 . The FES assessment includes a 
90-minute computer-based multiple-choice examination and a manual skills test to document 
adequate technical and psychomotor skills. The skills test is performed on a GI Mentor II, GI 
Bronch, GI Express, or Endo Mentor Suite Virtual Reality Trainer at designated test centers ( Fig 
10 ). 
The proprietary FES exam modules evaluate the examinee’s eﬃciency and precision on 5 
simulation exercises: navigation, loop reduction, retroﬂexion, mucosal evaluation, and target- 
ing/tool manipulation. Both portions of the examination are taken in the same testing appoint- 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
18 
Fig. 10. GI Mentor for a Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES) examination. 
ment. The ABS incorporated the FES Assessment as a ﬁnal milestone of their Flexible Endoscopy 
Curriculum (FEC), which is now required of all general surgery candidates for board certiﬁca- 
tion. The FEC outlines the recommended foundational knowledge and endoscopy experience, ob- 
tained via simulation and through minimum required cases, for general surgery residents. Given 
the mandatory FES certiﬁcation requirement from the ABS and ACGME case minimums for en- 
doscopy, endoscopic skills training, commonly using the FES curriculum, is now incorporated in 
all ACGME-accredited general surgery training programs. 
Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) 
The FUSE program was conceived by SAGES president-elect Dr. Steven Schwaitzberg in 2009 
in response to a perceived deﬁcit in understanding of energy devices used every day in surgery. 
In 2010, the SAGES president, Dr. Jo Buyske, created the FUSE task force, initially led by Drs. 
Daniel Jones, Liane Feldman, and Pascal Fuchshuber. From the outset, FUSE was envisioned as a 
universal educational program for any physician, nurse, or allied health professional who is in- 
volved in the use of energy devices in the clinical setting. 46 A pilot FUSE course was held at the 
SAGES meeting in 2011. At that time, an 11-item multiple choice pretest covering critical knowl- 
edge of surgical energy was administered to 48 SAGES leaders. 47 The median percentage correct 
was 59% and 31% of respondents gave incorrect answers regarding management of an operating 
room ﬁre and device interference with cardiac pacemakers. The same test was administered to 
FUSE course participants, whose median percent correct increased from 55% before the course 
to 90% after the course, providing further support for the need for this critical curriculum. A 
SAGES manual on the FUSE was developed and published in 2012. The manual content was sub- 
sequently transformed to an online modular curriculum, with module topics outlined in Table 
4 . The online curriculum is available free through the SAGES online organization wide learning 
system. The FUSE didactic modules are available in English, French, Spanish, and Chinese. FUSE 
has also developed hospital compliance modules for use in institutional training. As with the 
other Fundamentals programs, the FUSE program offers a certiﬁcation to those who successfully 
complete a validated, multiple-choice certifying examination. 
Although the FUSE didactic curriculum does not include hands-on simulation, the content has 
been adapted for use in a wide range of hands-on simulation activities. A Virtual Electrosurgery 
Skill Trainer (VEST) was developed by a group led by Suvranu De. In an initial validation study, 
participants felt the VR model was effective for learning electrosurgery fundamentals and almost 
one half of participants preferred the VEST simulator compared to an animal model. 48 Madani 
and colleagues describe a 2-hour FUSE curriculum consisting of a 1-hour didactic course on 
electrosurgical energy followed by a 1-hour goal-directed hands-on simulation session. 49 The 
19 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Table 4 
Fundamental use of surgical energy (FUSE) modules. 
0 
FUSE introduction 
1 
Fundamentals of electrosurgery 
2 
Mechanisms and prevention of adverse events 
3 
Monopolar devices 
4 
Bipolar devices 
5 
Radiofrequency for soft tissue ablation 
6 
Endoscopic devices 
7 
Ultrasonic energy devices 
8 
Microwave energy systems 
9 
Energy devices in pediatric surgery 
10 
Integration of energy systems with other devices 
11 
Surgical smoke and aerosolization safety 
simulation course was delivered to trainees at 11 residency programs in Canada, the United 
States, and the United Kingdom. Residents were randomized to complete the didactic session 
followed by the structured simulation session versus an unstructured session where trainees 
could use electrosurgical devices. All participants improved their score on the examination af- 
ter the intervention, but with higher scores in the structured simulation group. The simulation 
group also had higher scores 3 months after the session, although all scores decreased at the 3- 
month follow-up. The investigators followed up with trainee participants 1 year after the course. 
They found that trainees who completed the structured simulation curriculum maintained scores 
signiﬁcantly above their pretraining baseline, whereas those in the unstructured practice con- 
trol group had scores that were similar to their baseline. 50 Altieri and colleagues subsequently 
demonstrated that the use of telesimulation for the structured electrosurgical simulation was as 
effective in improving trainees’ knowledge and comfort in the safe use of electrosurgical devices 
as an in-person session delivered by an on-site proctor. 51 
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) Masters Program 
After fellowship, it is challenging for surgeons in practice to develop new technical skills. 
SAGES created a structure, the SAGES Masters Program, to help surgeons learn new operations 
in a graded pathway from proﬁciency, to competency, to master. 52 The curricula includes Fun- 
damentals and relies on simulation and coaching. 
Collaborative curricula from the American College of Surgeons, Association for Surgical Education, 
and Association of Program Directors in Surgery 
The ACS Division of Education has partnered with the ASE and APDS to develop, dissemi- 
nate, and maintain surgical skills curricula that span the entire 4 years of medical school, the 
transition to surgical residency, and the 5 clinical years of a general surgery residency. 
American College of Surgeons (ACS)/Association for Surgical Education (ASE) medical student 
simulation-based surgical skills curriculum 
The ACS and ASE Medical Student Simulation-Based Surgical Skills Curriculum originated in 
ASE at the 2009 Surgical Education Week. 53 The impetus for the curriculum arose from the 
observation that, due to a range of factors, students had diminishing opportunities for direct pa- 
tient care in medical school but were still expected to perform at the same level on day 1 of 
residency. A needs analysis of 4 medical schools identiﬁed that medical students sought simu- 
lation in the ﬁrst 2 years of medical school, while the clerkship directors were more inclined to 
wait until the third and fourth year of medical school before introducing simulation. 54 The ACS 
Division of Education joined the effort in 2010. 
The ACS ASE Steering Committee was headed by Drs. Kathy Liscum and Dan Jones. An initial 
list of topics was developed by expert consensus. The joint committee of the ACS and ASE sub- 
sequently conducted a needs assessment survey of clerkship directors nationally and fourth year 
medical students from 5 schools in distinct geographic regions to hone the ﬁnal list of topics. 54 
The curriculum’s modules were developed and edited from 2010 to 2012 ( Table 5 ). The modules 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
20 
Table 5 
American College of Surgeons/Association for Surgical Education medical student simulation-based surgical skills cur- 
riculum. 
Year 1 
Module 1: 
Acute bleeding–packing and tourniquet 
Module 2: 
Abdominal exam 
Module 3: 
Basic vascular exam 
Module 4: 
Breast exam 
Module 5: 
Digital rectal exam 
Module 6: 
Female pelvic exam 
Module 7: 
Male groin and genital exam 
Module 8: 
Universal precautions 
Module 9: 
Venipuncture and peripheral IV 
Year 2 
Module 1: 
Basic airway management 
Module 2: 
Communication–history and physical and case presentation 
Module 3: 
Foley bladder catheterization 
Module 4: 
Intermediate vascular exam 
Module 5: 
Nasogastric tubes 
Module 6: 
Sterile technique–gloving and gowning 
Module 7: 
Surgical drains–care and removal 
Module 8: 
Wounds–basic principles 
Year 3 
Module 1: 
Arterial puncture and blood gas 
Module 2: 
Basic gastric tube placement and care 
Module 3: 
Basic knot tying 
Module 4: 
Basic splinting – a universal physician’s skill 
Module 5: 
Basic stoma care 
Module 6: 
Basic suturing 
Module 7: 
Central venous line insertion 
Module 8: 
Communication–during codes and safe and effective 
handoffs 
Module 9: 
Intermediate airway 
Module 10: 
Intraosseous IV 
Module 11: 
Local anesthetics 
Module 12: 
Lumps and bumps 
Module 13: 
Paracentesis 
Module 14: 
Thoracentesis 
Module 15: 
Ultrasound basics 
Year 4 
Module 1: 
Organ-speciﬁc ultrasound diagnosis 
are designed to teach core physician skills for all medical students, regardless of intended spe- 
cialty. Each module includes an outline of the intended simulation activities and an assessment 
rubric. The assessments are designed for formative feedback to students, not as a summative 
evaluation. Many modules included supplemental materials including instructional videos. The 
modules were designed to progress from year to year of medical school, but given the modular 
nature, they can be adapted to ﬁt any institutional curriculum. The curriculum was released to 
ASE members in 2013 and nationally in 2014. The curriculum is available at no cost to students 
and faculty who register with a valid email address. Early implementation of select program 
modules across multiple medical schools showed that nearly all learners achieved proﬁciency in 
suturing, knot tying, and basic airway skills. 55 , 56 An expert review of the ACS/ASE Curriculum 
achieved consensus on 5 core Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs) from the American As- 
sociation of Medical. Colleges (AAMC) that could be taught and assessed using the curriculum’s 
modules: gather a history and perform a physical examination, provide an oral presentation of a 
clinical encounter, give or receive patient handover to transition care responsibility, collaborate 
as a member of an interprofessional team, and perform procedures. 57 
American College of Surgeons (ACS)/Association of Program Directors in Surgery (APDS)/Association 
for Surgical Education (ASE) resident preparatory curriculum 
The ACS/APDS/ASE Entering Surgery Resident Preparatory Task Force conducted a survey in 
2009 of surgery interns to assess their preparedness for essential skills for safe patient care 
21 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
and common intern tasks. 58 Interns overall reported feeling moderately prepared for medical 
knowledge and patient care requirements, but well prepared for professionalism, communica- 
tion, practice-based learning, and systems-based practice requirements. Interns who had par- 
ticipated in a residency preparatory curriculum during their ﬁnal year of medical school had 
statistically signiﬁcantly higher self-assessed evaluation of their technical skills, professionalism, 
communication skills, and overall preparation. Ultimately, the task force developed a surgery 
resident prep curriculum, which was piloted by 39 institutions in 2014. The content focuses 
on critical skills for the ﬁrst weeks of residency. The program’s goals and objectives are subdi- 
vided in the domains of patient care and medical knowledge, technical skills, professionalism, 
interpersonal skills and communication, practice-based learning and improvement, and systems 
based practice. 59 As of 2023, the ACS reported 133 participating institutions. Those participat- 
ing institutions have access to content for faculty and students, ready-to-use teaching materials, 
modular content, and a site to track student progress and produce completion certiﬁcates. Pro- 
grams must deliver the designated essential modules and have access to other modules to use 
as needed. The curriculum focuses heavily on simulation for core intern tasks, technical skills, 
communication, and professionalism. The modular content can be adapted to each institution’s 
needs and resources. One interesting essential module is a mock page program administered 
through Southern Illinois University. The mock page program was reported by Boehler and col- 
leagues. 60 In 2013 and 2014, they delivered the mock page cases to 213 medical students from 
12 medical schools. Participating students could receive a mock call from a standardized nurse 
or patient anytime during the day or night during the program period. Immediate feedback was 
provided to the student after the call, and course directors received a weekly debrieﬁng report 
through the 4 weeks of the program. Students showed improved communication and clinical 
decision making over the 4 weeks of the course. A 2018 survey of general surgery residency 
program directors assessed the value of a residency prep curriculum. Based on program director 
perception, interns who had completed a preparatory curriculum had a statistically signiﬁcant 
improvement in technical skills and a nonsigniﬁcant trend toward improvement for interper- 
sonal skills, medical knowledge, patient care, systems-based practice, problem-based learning, 
and professionalism, compared to their peers who did not have a residency preparatory curricu- 
lum. 61 
American College of Surgeons (ACS)/Association of Program Directors in Surgery (APDS) resident 
skills curriculum 
A Surgical Skills Curriculum Task Force was established in 2005 by the ACS and APDS to de- 
velop a standardized simulation curriculum for general surgery residents ( Table 6 ). The commit- 
tee was led by Gary Dunnington, MD, Helen MacRae, MD, and Debra DaRosa, PhD, who recruited 
content experts for the proposed modules. The curriculum rolled out in 2007 (phase 1) and 2008 
(phases 2 and 3). Phase 1, Core Skills, includes 16 modules intended for residents early in train- 
ing. Phase 2, Advanced Procedures, include 15 modules intended for mid- to senior-level resi- 
dents with instructions for simulating common surgical procedures. Phase 3, Team-Based Skills, 
includes 10 modules designed to teach surgery residents optimal team behavior via simulated 
patient care scenarios. 
The curriculum materials are available free of charge to anyone who registers through the 
ACS Course Catalog and can be accessed via the links on the overview website - https://www. 
facs.org/for- medical- professionals/education/programs/acsapds-surgery-resident-skills- 
curriculum/ . However, although the course materials are free to review, the cost of full 
implementation could be signiﬁcant. A 2011 report from the University of Pennsylvania detailed 
the costs associated with their implementation and continued delivery of the ACS/APDS Surgical 
Skills Curriculum. They described a $4.204 million initial capital expenditure to develop the 
required simulation space and purchase necessary equipment and a cost of $12,516 per resident 
for the yearly 4-week dedicated simulation rotation in the ﬁrst and second year in which 
the curriculum is delivered. 62 A 2010 report from Northwestern University detailed the costs 
associated with implementation of 14 of 16 phase 1 modules. That study detailed a budget of 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
22 
Table 6 
American College of Surgeons/Association of Program Directors in surgery resident skills curriculum modules. 
Phase 1: core skills 
Phase 2: advanced procedures 
Phase 3: team-based skills 
1. Asepsis and instrument 
Identiﬁcation 
2. Knot tying 
3. Suturing 
4. Wound closure and skin 
ﬂaps 
5. Skin grafts 
6. Urethral catheterization 
7. Airway management 
8. Chest tube insertion 
9. Central line insertion 
10. Surgical biopsy 
11. Laparotomy opening and 
closure 
12. Basic laparoscopy skills 
13. Advanced laparoscopy skills 
14. Hand-sewn bowel 
anastomosis 
15. Stapled bowel anastomosis 
16. Arterial anastomosis 
1. Laparoscopic ventral hernia repair 
2. Open colon resection, lap right colon 
resection 
3. Laparoscopic sigmoid resection 
4. Open right colon resection 
5. Laparoscopic/open bile duct 
exploration 
6. Laparoscopic ventral/incisional 
hernia repair (porcine model) 
7. Laparoscopic appendectomy 
8. Laparoscopic nissen fundoplication 
9. Sentinel node biopsy & axillary 
lymph node dissection 
10. Open inguinal/femoral hernia repair 
11. Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair 
12. Laparoscopic/open splenectomy 
13. Laparoscopic/open cholecystectomy 
14. Gastric resection and peptic ulcer 
disease 
15. Parathyroidectomy/Thyroidectomy 
1. Teamwork in the trauma bay 
2. Postoperative hypotension 
3. Laparoscopic crisis 
4. The preoperative brieﬁng 
5. Laparoscopic troubleshooting 
6. Postoperative pulmonary 
embolus 
7. Postoperative MI (cardiogenic 
shock) 
8. Latex allergy anaphylaxis 
9. Patient handoff
10. Retained sponge on postop 
chest x-ray 
Table 7 
Promulgation of selected American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma educational course offerings.65 
ATLS 2004-2021 
ATOM 2004-2020 
ASSET 2008-2021 
BEST 2016-2021 
Total courses 
51,427 
1214 
1043 
144 
Total students trained 
779,847 
5829 
6492 
817 
Total countries 
86 
16 
39 
25 
Total US states/Canadian provinces 
All 
28 
39 
25 
ATLS, advanced trauma life support; ATOM, advanced trauma operative management; ASSET, advanced surgical skills for 
exposure in trauma; BEST, basic endovascular skills for trauma. 
$187,0 0 0 to purchase all new simulators, with the cost reduced to $21,500 using materials that 
were shared or developed in-house by the program. 63 
American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma Education Programs 
Teaching and learning trauma patient management and trauma surgery present challenges 
because of the ﬁeld’s inherently unpredictable nature. The ACS CoT offers a series of simulation- 
based education programs to help address these challenges in training. The different programs 
are oriented toward learners with a range of experience, from community members to dedi- 
cated trauma fellows and practicing surgeons. The programs utilize a wide range of simulation 
modalities, including focused task trainers, high-ﬁdelity manikins, animal models, and cadaver 
models. Dr. Mayur Narayan is a member of the Senior Educator Advisory Board (SEAB) of the ACS 
CoT which is responsible for the educational construct and delivery of all CoT courses. The team 
comprises 15 leading experts of surgical education across the globe. In addition, he is the Editor- 
in-Chief of the 4th edition of the ACS Trauma Evaluation & Management (TEAM) Course. The ACS 
CoT programs have been widely promulgated ( Table 7 ). In a 2018 systematic review of open sur- 
gical skills training courses for trauma, 21 published courses were evaluated by Mackenzie and 
colleagues using Kirkpatrick’s framework for evaluation of complex educational interventions. 64 
Most courses had only Kirkpatrick level 1 (reactions) and level 2 (learning) evidence of bene- 
ﬁt by participant self-evaluation. Only 3 courses—ATLS, Advanced Surgical Skills for Exposure in 
Trauma (ASSET), and Advanced Trauma Operative Management (ATOM)—all ACS CoT programs, 
had Kirkpatrick level 2 and level 3 (behaviors) evidence of beneﬁt and evidence of skills reten- 
tion over time. The CoT has active engagement of a large cohort of surgeons to continuously up- 
23 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
date course materials and methods to ensure the programs remain current with updated trauma 
research and practice. 
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) 
The ATLS course was initially developed by Dr. James K. Styner, MD, after he experienced 
a personal tragedy in a traumatic accident. He and his family were involved in a plane crash 
in which his wife died at the scene. 65 He and his children were taken to a local rural hospital 
where they were evaluated by practitioners with little experience in trauma management. The 
experience drove him to develop a course to teach basic trauma evaluation and management. 
The basic ATLS “ABCDE” algorithm of Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, and Exposure 
was developed by expert consensus and the course focused on identifying and treating immedi- 
ately life-threatening injuries ﬁrst. The course was presented to leaders of the ACS CoT in 1979. 
The course was approved by the ACS Board of Regents in 1980 and disseminated nationally, 
quickly becoming the standard in trauma evaluation and management in the United States and 
Canada. Eventually, the program was promulgated internationally and is now translated into 10 
languages and delivered in 86 total countries. 
The course content is updated roughly every 4 years with the 10th edition launching in 2017- 
2018 including a mobile-learning platform. Participants are provided the course manual and di- 
rected to review the content in advance of the course. During the course, trained faculty review 
highlights of the course content, lead the participants through clinical scenarios, and provide 
instruction in hands-on simulation of relevant procedures. Learners are assessed via a written 
examination and simulated trauma patient encounters on mannequins. Since its inception, ATLS 
has been the paradigm of trauma education and even served as an example for development of 
training courses in other domains, like the FLS curriculum. 
Advanced Trauma Operative Management (ATOM) 
The ATOM course was developed by Lenworth Jacobs, MD, MPH, in 1998. He developed the 
course content by recreating actual cases from the operating room to understand which prob- 
lems could be represented by a porcine model. 65 The ﬁrst course was offered in 2001. The course 
uses a porcine model to simulate common penetrating injuries to the chest and abdomen. The 
course is intended for senior surgical trainees and military or general surgeons in practice who 
may not frequently encounter these penetrating injuries. The course includes six 30-minute lec- 
tures and a 3-hour hands-on session during which the course participants manage 12 different 
injuries with one-to-one supervision by a course instructor. Dr. Jacobs and colleagues published 
results from the ﬁrst 50 ATOM course students, which included expert traumatologists, general 
surgeons, trauma fellows, and fourth- and ﬁfth-year general surgery residents. 66 All groups had 
improvement in knowledge and self-eﬃcacy after the course. A survey of ATOM course partic- 
ipants in 2008 included 4 4 4 participants from 36 states and 17 countries. 67 Comments were 
largely positive, with approximately 80% to 90% of respondents indicating the course helped 
them identify and address injuries faster and more effectively. Ninety-nine percent of respon- 
dents felt the ATOM course is worthwhile. The ATOM course has also been described as an 
avenue for trauma team training. Perkins and colleagues describe development of a complemen- 
tary course to ATOM for trauma OR staff. 68 Participating OR staff included nurses and surgical 
technicians. Participants had a didactic session in the morning addressing fundamental concepts 
of trauma surgery and OR preparation. They also had a chance to practice a trauma setup for the 
OR and assemble specialized equipment with an experienced trauma surgical technician. In the 
afternoon, the participants worked with surgeon participants in a simultaneous ATOM course as 
they managed the penetrating injury scenarios in the porcine model. Course participants showed 
a signiﬁcant improvement in knowledge after the course and 90.5% reported they were “highly 
satisﬁed” with the course. 
Advanced Surgical Skills for Exposure in Trauma (ASSET) 
The ASSET course was developed by the CoT Surgical Skills Committee under the leadership 
of Drs. Luchette and Bowyer. The committee was established in 2005 speciﬁcally to develop 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
24 
a standardized, skills-based course focused on exposure of anatomic structures whose injuries 
may be immediately threatening to life and limb. The committee developed their list of life 
and limb-threatening injuries for inclusion in the course using a modiﬁed Delphi process. They 
developed a course manual, standardized teaching slides, case-based clinical scenarios, and brief 
video demonstrations of the procedures to be performed by participants. The manual reviews 
key surgical exposures in the neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis, and upper and lower extremities. 
The 1-day course involves hands-on performance of the exposures on fresh human cadavers 
with close faculty (1:4 ratio) oversight and guidance. 
The pilot course was conducted in March 2008 at the Uniformed Services University fol- 
lowed by a second course in October 2008 at the Stritch School of Medicine of Loyola University 
of Chicago. Kuhls and colleagues reported on the development of the course and outcomes of 
the ﬁrst 4 beta courses. 69 Participants included senior surgical trainees, PGY4 and above. Partic- 
ipants had statistically signiﬁcant increases in self-assessed conﬁdence in operative skills in all 
anatomic regions included in the course and across all levels of training. In the overall course 
evaluation, participants’ average rating across all questions was 4.73 out of 5, with “I gained 
new knowledge” at 4.80, “I learned new techniques” at 4.72, “I would recommend this course 
to colleagues” at 4.91, and ”The amount of time allotted was appropriate” at 4.32. Beginning 
in March 2010, the ACS CoT has offered the course publicly for continuing medical education 
(CME) credit. Courses are now offered monthly across multiple states and countries. Bowyer and 
colleagues subsequently reported on the ﬁrst 25 ASSET courses conducted after its ﬁnal stan- 
dardization in September 2010 through February 2012. 70 The students in those courses included 
91 surgical trainees and 123 practicing surgeons. As with the beta courses, students reported a 
statistically signiﬁcant improvement in comfort level or eﬃcacy for all 25 ASSET skills that were 
reported from the pre and postsurveys. On aggregate course evaluation via 5-point Likert scale, 
participants responded with 4.83 out of 5 for “I gained new knowledge,” 4.83 out of 5 for “I 
learned new techniques,” and 4.92 out of 5 for “I would recommend this course to colleagues.”
An ASSET + course has been developed speciﬁcally for military surgeons. The ASSET + course in- 
cludes the standard ASSET content, plus neurosurgery, obstetrics and gynecology, ophthalmology, 
and orthopedics. The course is expanded to 2 days and has a 1:1 trainee to instructor ratio. 
Mackenzie and colleagues with the Retention and Assessment of Surgical Performance (RASP) 
Group of Investigators evaluated surgical trainees before, just after, and months after taking the 
ASSET course. 71 Overall trainee performance improved when evaluated within 4 weeks after 
completion of the ASSET course. The improvement persisted on follow-up evaluation 12 to 18 
months after ASSET training. Not surprisingly, interval experience during the follow-up period 
also affected trainee performance at the 12 to 18 month evaluation. The RASP group also evalu- 
ated a cohort of practicing surgeons, who were not dedicated traumatologists, at 30 months (on 
average) from the completion of an ASSET course. 72 Overall, the practicing surgeons group had 
lower performance scores compared to residents who had completed the ASSET course more 
recently (an average of 14 months) and experts in trauma surgery. Across all 3 groups, poor 
performance correlated with low interval experience in performing the procedures. The study 
authors note that, in the absence of opportunities to perform the procedures in the clinical set- 
ting, skills training refreshers may be needed to prevent signiﬁcant skills degradation. 
Basic Endovascular Skills for Trauma (BEST) 
The Basic Endovascular Skills for Trauma (BEST) course was initially developed by Dr. Megan 
Brenner and colleagues at the R. Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center in Baltimore, Maryland. 
The ﬁrst course was delivered to faculty in the Division of Trauma and Critical Care at Shock 
Trauma in 2013. 73 The 13 participants were board eligible or board certiﬁed general surgeons 
or emergency medicine physicians who took calls in the trauma resuscitation unit. Participants 
were required to be novice interventionalists, with no prior endovascular training, no partic- 
ipation in prior similar training courses, and no previous experience performing resuscitative 
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) in the clinical setting. Participants received 
didactic instruction on indications, steps, and pitfalls of REBOA along with percutaneous and 
open cannulation of the femoral artery. The participants then performed the procedure with in- 
25 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
structors in a simulated setting. The initial course utilized a VR simulator, the Vascular Interven- 
tion System Training Simulator-C (Mentice VIST-C). The simulator allowed for virtual ﬂuoroscopy 
to allow participants to visualize and better understand the procedure when performing REBOA 
with the instructor. Participants were then assessed on 3 attempts at placing the REBOA in zone 
I and 3 attempts at placing the REBOA in zone III using only virtual digital x-ray imaging, to re- 
ﬂect the resources of the actual clinical setting. Participants showed a signiﬁcant improvement 
in knowledge from the pretest to the post-test and had a signiﬁcant decrease in procedural task 
time from their ﬁrst to their sixth attempts. All participants agreed that the course was bene- 
ﬁcial, that it prepared them to perform the procedure on their next call, and that they would 
recommend the course to other acute care surgeons. In 2014, the course was opened to outside 
participants with wide interest resulting in 1 course per month for many years. In 2016, the 
BEST course joined the ACS CoT and Surgical Skills Committee. The BEST course has transitioned 
from VR to perfused cadaver models and includes training in endovascular techniques including 
REBOA as well as ultrasound-guided femoral artery access, percutaneous and open cannulation 
of the common femoral artery, and common femoral artery repair. As of 2021, BEST had been 
delivered to over 800 course participants in 25 states and Canadian provinces and 25 total coun- 
tries. 
Stop the bleed 
Stop the bleed (STB) developed from a White House interagency workgroup in 2015 with 
a goal of increasing national resilience by preparing the public to stop life threatening bleed- 
ing. The phrase and logo are owned by the Department of Defense, which licenses them to the 
ACS, where the program is administered by the CoT. Unlike most CoT educational programs, STB 
is primarily targeted to nonmedical personnel, with nearly 4 million people worldwide trained 
since its inception. The STB course uses didactic materials and supervised hands-on practice on 
focused task trainers to teach 3 key techniques for hemorrhage control: manual pressure, wound 
packing, and tourniquet application. Within the medical community, the curriculum is increas- 
ingly being taught at the medical school level. Medical students have proven to be receptive to 
the curriculum, feeling empowered by the training to personally intervene on acute bleeding if 
necessary 74 and effectively serving as course instructors after their training. 75 Effort s are ongo- 
ing to optimize content delivery, with innovations including development of a perfused synthetic 
cadaver model to simulate active bleeding during the practical portion of the course. 76 At the 
ACS CoT annual meeting in 2018, Dr. Narayan raised the question on whether the 3 lifesaving 
skills of STB could be taught remotely to increase the dissemination. This suggestion was met 
with signiﬁcant pushback as other trauma leaders insisted that a skills instructor would need 
to be present to teach the course effectively. During the pandemic era, Drs. Mayur Narayan and 
Ziad Sifri (Rutgers, New Brunswick & Rutgers Newark) studied video-based 77 and virtual live in- 
struction 78 of STB, respectively, and were both shown to teach course content effectively. Finally, 
although developed as an initiative of the United States government, the STB course has been 
successfully implemented internationally, including in low- and middle-income (LMICs) coun- 
tries in Asia, Africa, and South America. 79 , 80 In 2017, Dr. Mayur Narayan helped bring the ﬁrst 
STB course to India and has now helped disseminate the training to more than 20,0 0 0 police 
oﬃcers. This training was conducted with the assistance of SaveLIFE Foundation, a nongovern- 
mental organization (NGO) that addresses road safety and trauma care in India and is the winner 
of the 2024 Skoll Awards for Social Innovation. 
Virtual reality for surgical simulation 
Pilots were regularly training in ﬂight simulators. Many wondered if this same technology 
could help train laparoscopic surgeons in the new era of minimally invasive surgery. Washing- 
ton University Institute for Minimally Invasive Surgery (WUMIS) drafted a grant to the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 1994 and Dr. Dan Jones approached McDonnell 
Douglas aerospace company. The response was deﬁnitive, that surgery was much more com- 
plex than ﬂight. There was not enough computer power or know-how to develop a simulator 
for surgery. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
26 
Fig. 11. Tasks: (A) checkerboard, (B) bean drop, (C) rope walk, (D) triangle transfer, (E) endo stitch. 
Nevertheless, companies like Ethicon-Endo Surgery tried to develop the Preceptor, a laparo- 
scopic cholecystectomy (LC) simulator. As a general surgery resident and consultant, Dr. Jones 
was convinced of the future of simulation. Eventually, the bulk of the simulator and cost be- 
came prohibitive to maintain. Surgery identiﬁed the potential for VR simulators but had to 
await computer software advancements. 
In the late 1990s, laparoscopic video equipment (laparoscope, camera, light source) was rolled 
into the skills lab for learners to practice within a box that simulated the abdominal cavity. 4 
Tasks were developed from simple to more complex, with the ultimate goal to learn laparoscopic 
suturing ( Fig 11 ). 
At UT Southwestern, we used the Jones video trainers by Storz Endoscopy to develop skills. 4 
In a randomized study, we had PGY 2 residents perform a LC. One half of the trainees prac- 
ticed 30 minutes per day for 2 weeks in the simulation center. 3 The other half did their usual 
patient care activities. At the end of the month, everyone was observed by a blinded observer 
while they performed a LC. Trainees who practiced tasks improved, but they also performed 
measurably better in the OR. This was the ﬁrst time we showed that practicing skills translated 
into improved OR performance. 
The MIST VR was a commercial product that allowed trainees to use a laparoscopic instru- 
ment to do VR tasks. 5 , 81 The original VR tasks would ask the learner to do tasks moving virtual 
objects, circles, squares, and cylinders ( Fig 12 ). The tasks required eye hand coordination but 
did not resemble operative tasks at all. We performed a similar study whereby PGY 2 residents 
were observed doing a LC. One half of trainees were randomized to practice skills for 2 weeks. 
We again had a blinded observer score, and all residents performed a LC. Like before, those who 
practiced got better on tasks. They also got better in the OR, slightly more than what was seen 
training using video trainers despite trainees preferring the video trainers to MIST VR. We be- 
lieve this may be that the VR system provided feedback on accuracy and precision or movements 
of right and left hand in contrast to video trainers that measured task completion times. In the 
real world, precision is likely more important than speed. 
Over time, the VR platform allowed commercialization as more realistic tasks and operations 
were developed. In addition to LC, more complex operations like sleeve gastrectomy and gastric 
bypass ( Fig 13 ) were being taught on virtual simulators. 
27 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Fig. 12. Minimally invasive surgical trainer virtual reality (MIST-VR) tasks. 
Fig. 13. Virtual reality Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. 
SAGES embraced the GI Mentor as the platform for the FES certiﬁcate and popularized the 
sale of the GI Mentor as FES Testing Sites purchased simulators for testing. Once the ABS man- 
dated FES certiﬁcation prior to sitting for the board examination in surgery, many residency 
programs purchased the GI Mentor to allow residents to practice for the examination. 
Our research group focused our efforts on developing simulators for surgery using VR. In col- 
laboration with Dr. Suvranu De (Professor at RPI and now Dean at Florida State University), we 
ﬁrst looked to develop VR versions of the FLS exam. We developed a VR endoloop, peg transfer, 
circle cutting, and suturing tasks. 82-89 VR lacked tactile realistic tactile feedback, but it allowed 
real time feedback on task performance. The actual FLS examination required sending looped 
foam, cut gauze, and sutured penrose to be sent out to be scored for quality and accuracy. A 
second advantage of VR, is there were not a lot of expensive consumable product required such 
as endoloops, sutures, and penrose. VR also proved useful for teaching key operative steps such 
as passage of the laparoscopic band 90 and graded complexity such as a diﬃcult airway ( Fig 14 ) 
, 91-93 and confusing concepts such as spread of radiofrequency energy ( Fig 15 ) , 48-50 , 94 and re- 
sponse to a VR OR ﬁre. 11 , 95 , 96 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
28 
Fig. 14. Virtual reality diﬃcult airway. 
Fig. 15. Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) virtual reality simulator. 
Some of the most popular commercial VR simulations have been developed for learning 
robotic surgery. This teaches both tasks and operations such as robotic inguinal and ventral her- 
nia operations ( Fig 16 ). The Fundamentals of Robot Surgery uses simulation as the framework to 
teach robotic surgery. Gamiﬁcation has been used to engage resident learners. 97 
The holy grail of VR was the idea of creating a Star Trek Holodeck for Surgery. The head 
mounted viewing system proved very immersive and as computer power skyrocketed engineers 
were able to tap gaming software to develop amazing VR simulations for the ﬁrst time. 10 , 98 The 
surgeon could walk into a VR OR as an avatar and perform gradually more complex operations 
and scenarios ( Fig 17 ). As the VR gaming industry advanced programming, around 2015 we had 
computer power to begin developing more immersive VR learning. Over the last 20 years we 
had been doing team training using manikins; now only our imagination limited crisis scenarios. 
Our group developed a virtual mock OR. 10 We decided to study how surgeons, anesthesi- 
ologists, and OR nurses responded to an OR ﬁre. Although most providers believed they had 
suﬃcient experience to deal with an OR ﬁre from the Association of Perioperative Registered 
Nurses (AORN) and FUSE courses, few had ever experienced an actual OR ﬁre. There are esti- 
mated to be approximately 500 OR ﬁres annually in the United States. In our study, a provider 
29 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Fig. 16. Robot simulator: (A) tasks, (B) inguinal hernia, (C) ventral hernia. 
Fig. 17. Virtual OR: (A) Operating room ﬁre, (B) Oculus headset, (C) response options, (D) correct response sequence. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
30 
Fig. 18. Multiple avatars communicating and acting together. 
wears an Oculus Headset and is immersed in a VR OR. The drapes catch ﬁre, and the partic- 
ipant has choices as to how to manage the crisis while listening to sirens and vision obscured 
with virtual smoke. When we tested 185 surgeons, anesthesiologists, and nurses, less than 5% 
passed and turned off the oxygen feeding the ﬁre. 11 , 95 With repetition, almost all improved per- 
formance. This also highlights how VR simulation can do scenarios that would be costly, timely, 
and dangerous as an actual simulation versus a virtual simulation. 
We have found that in addition to immersion, VR allows a medium for teaching complex 
concepts. 
For example, we wanted to teach surgical trainees about the principles of energy, 
speciﬁcally for FUSE. 48-50 , 94 In 1 study, we wanted to show the path of radiofrequency energy 
from the Bovie tip to the dispersive electrode. 94 In another study, we used VR to demonstrate 
the principle of capacitance coupling, charge, insuﬄation failure, and sparks, depending on how 
laparoscopic instruments are used. 48 
Our current VR research seeks to explore how OR teams work together to solve complex 
problems during a crisis. Instead of 1 Oculus and 1 avatar, we are now seeking multiple aviators 
( Fig 18 ). We can study decision-making of the surgeon, anesthesiologist, ﬁrst assistant, and 
nurse ( Fig 19 ). Who speaks up? Is a checklist used? How does hierarchy, gender, or racism hinder 
communication? How can we strengthen team communication? VR can create a safe space to 
learn and develop technical and nontechnical skills. The virtual platform facilitates training, 
innovation, and research. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence and its integration in surgery 
AI possesses capabilities that mirror human cognition and judgment. As global volumes of 
treatable surgical conditions, such as cancer, injuries, and noncommunicable diseases 99 continue 
to rise, the integration of AI into surgical workﬂows presents a promising solution to over- 
come the limitations of infrastructure, training, and human capacity. 100 , 101 AI algorithms, utiliz- 
ing population-level data, already guide surgical risk assessments and enhance the capabilities 
of robotic surgery, with numerous studies demonstrating that their performance can exceed or 
complement that of human experts in speciﬁc medical use cases. 102 , 103 
Despite its potential, AI applications in surgery have often been narrowly focused on spe- 
ciﬁc diseases or standalone procedures. However, by leveraging the diverse strengths of AI 
technologies—such as machine learning (ML), natural language processing (NLP), computer vi- 
sion (CV), and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN)—a broader and more integrated approach is 
31 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Fig. 19. Surgeon interacting with multiple avatars in a virtual operating room. 
emerging. These technologies, when applied with insight and precision, promise to transform 
surgical education and practice. The importance of surgical education cannot be overstated, as it 
is fundamental to preparing skilled surgeons capable of meeting the growing global demand for 
surgical care. As AI tools continue to evolve, they herald a paradigm shift in surgical education, 
offering new ways to enhance learning, improve outcomes, and expand the capabilities of sur- 
geons. This transformation holds the potential not only to improve surgical proﬁciency but also 
to ensure that high-quality surgical care is accessible to all who need it. 
Several FDA-approved AI tools, underpinned by ML, are already making signiﬁcant strides 
across various stages of patient care. 104 For instance, ML algorithms have demonstrated greater 
accuracy than traditional clinical guidelines in predicting lung cancer staging. 105 Additionally, 
they have been effectively applied for surgical imaging analysis, decision support, and operative 
planning. Other applications include ML-integrated triage tools that identify signs of inadequate 
organ perfusion and automatically alert surgical teams to intervene. 106 At a patient-centric level, 
ML models can accurately gauge the eﬃcacy of interventions, such as predicting responses to 
ﬂuid administration in kidney injury scenarios. 107 Although classical scoring systems still as- 
sist with risk assessment and surgical planning, they relate patient factors linearly and addi- 
tively. In contrast, ML models can capture intricate multidimensional relationships and interac- 
tions between variables. 108 This depth of analysis paves the way for enhanced surgical decision- 
making, workﬂow eﬃciency, and predictive accuracy, all culminating in improved patient 
outcomes. 
CV enables systems to interpret and understand visual data, thus unlocking an array of pos- 
sibilities from enhancing training and education, operative complexity analysis, operative assess- 
ment and feedback, and ﬁnally intraoperative decision support. 109 By processing high-resolution 
surgical video feeds, CV algorithms can identify anatomical structures, surgical tools, and steps 
in a procedure. 110 Moreover, CV algorithms can provide automated assessment and feedback 
on surgical videos to augment coaching and skill development. 111 The Virtual Operative Assis- 
tant (VOA), for instance, utilizes CV for comprehensive simulation-based learning, breaking down 
intricate procedures. 112 Additionally, CV shows promise for improving surgical decision-making 
through surgical phase recognition; algorithms can process videos to detect expected versus un- 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
32 
Fig. 20. (A) Video trainer. (B) Virtual reality tasks. (C) Mock operating room team training. (D) Virtual operating room. 
expected steps and alert surgeons. 113 Multiple groups have developed CV models to segment 
anatomy, recognize instruments, and classify surgeon skill level with better than 90% accuracy 
by analyzing video data. 114 Furthermore, "surgical ﬁngerprinting" identiﬁes deviations from stan- 
dard procedures, potentially highlighting complication-prone areas. 115 
Much like navigating the dense molecular signaling of neurons, powerful ANN algorithms 
can trace hidden relationships across vast datasets of surgical cases and patient factors. 116 ANNs 
33 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Table 8 
Beneﬁts and challenges of artiﬁcial intelligence. 
Beneﬁts 
Challenges 
Enhanced learning experience 
- Personalized education 
- Adaptive learning 
Technological limitations 
- Integration with existing system 
- Data quality and availability 
Improved skill assessment 
- Objective evaluation 
- Standardized metrics 
Ethical and legal concerns 
- Privacy and security 
- Bias and fairness 
Simulation and virtual reality 
- Realistic training environments 
Rare case simulation 
Resistance to change 
- Adoption by educators and trainees 
Cultural and institutional barriers 
Data driven insights 
- Performance analytics 
- Predictive analytics 
Cost and resource allocation 
- High initial investment 
- Ongoing maintenance and upgrades 
Enhanced collaboration and communication 
Ensuring reliability and accuracy 
have revolutionized in-hospital mortality prediction after hepatic malignancy surgeries, achiev- 
ing higher accuracy than traditional logistic regression techniques. 117 This breakthrough signiﬁ- 
cantly impacts patient outcomes in regions where hepatocellular carcinoma is highly prevalent. 
In cholecystectomy, ANNs function as expert systems, streamlining workﬂows and improving 
concurrent diagnoses. 118 In addition, ANNs show tremendous promise in medical imaging anal- 
ysis, with applications ranging from tumor detection in mammography to tissue classiﬁcation 
in magnetic resonance imaging. 119 Together, these diverse use cases showcase the substantial 
capabilities of ANNs to enhance risk analytics and resource optimization, optimize treatment 
strategies, and reduce diagnostic uncertainty through their unparalleled ability to model multi- 
dimensional datasets. 
Lastly, NLP enables nuanced computational understanding and generation of human language. 
It is already demonstrating immense potential to transform surgical care through enhanced clin- 
ical documentation by automating the extraction of diagnoses and procedure codes from elec- 
tronic health records, ensuring both time eﬃciency and accuracy. 120 Additionally, NLP tools ex- 
hibit high performance in analyzing clinical narratives like radiology reports to identify key ﬁnd- 
ings. 120 NLP also shows promise for optimizing evidence-based decision-making by eﬃciently 
extracting insights from literature to provide real-time guidance. Beyond documentation, NLP 
could even change surgeon-computer interaction through virtual scribes that listen and trans- 
late OR dialog. 121 And for education, NLP systems can parse academic texts and surgical conver- 
sations to create comprehensive surgical educational resources. 109 Overall, these diverse appli- 
cations showcase NLP’s capabilities to streamline workﬂows, advancing clinical documentation, 
enhancing decision support, democratizing research, and ultimately improving patient outcomes 
through comprehending nuances in language. 
A harmonized blend of technology, complemented by the combined endeavors of surgeons, 
researchers, and tech specialists, set the stage for enhancing surgical training, including per- 
sonalized learning, objective skill assessment, and realistic simulations while also presenting 
challenges such as technological limitations, ethical concerns, and resistance to change. Table 8 
summarizes the beneﬁts and challenges of using AI in surgical education. Addressing these chal- 
lenges through careful planning, investment, and continuous evaluation will be crucial to fully 
harness the potential of AI in transforming surgical education. 
Collection and analysis of surgical data 
The intraoperative period is a data-rich environment, providing an invaluable resource for 
surgical education and simulation. 103 , 122 Continuous monitoring of physiological parameters 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
34 
amid complex alterations to anatomy and physiology makes this time the core of surgical prac- 
tice. As discussed previously, advances in intraoperative CV have enabled signiﬁcant progress in 
the analysis of anatomy, including the assessment of tissue characteristics, dissection planes, and 
pathology identiﬁcation. 111 , 113 Additionally, the reliable identiﬁcation of instruments and stages 
of operation, as well as the prediction of procedural next steps, are crucial for developing future 
autonomous systems and data-driven improvements in surgical techniques. 
Events inside the OR have substantial impacts on recovery, postoperative complications, and 
oncological outcomes. Despite their pivotal importance, minimal data are currently recorded, an- 
alyzed, or collected in this setting. 123 Additionally, visual analytics tools and methodologies play 
a vital role in presenting complex data in an understandable format, facilitating better decision- 
making and comprehension among surgical trainees. 124 Thus, harnessing valuable data streams 
from the intraoperative period can signiﬁcantly contribute to advances in surgical automation 
and underpin the utility of AI in the OR, especially for educational purposes. 
In the context of surgical education and simulation, the integration of various data sources 
becomes even more critical. 
Electronic health record. The EHR integrates patient histories, laboratory results, and imaging 
studies to support surgical planning and outcomes analysis. These data can be used to create 
realistic, patient-speciﬁc scenarios in simulation training. 
Intraoperative video recordings. Intraoperative video footage can be used for performance 
review and training. These recordings can serve as a valuable resource for trainees to study 
surgical techniques, decision-making processes, and intraoperative management. 
Intraoperative variables. Monitoring variables such as the length of the procedure, duration 
of anesthesia, and OR throughput can help in understanding the eﬃciency and effectiveness of 
surgical practices, which can then be incorporated into simulation scenarios to enhance training. 
Intraoperative biomedical images. Using real-time imaging data can be used to educate 
trainees on recognizing anatomical structures, pathology, and surgical landmarks. These data can 
be incorporated into virtual and augmented reality simulations to provide an immersive learning 
experience. 
Sensor data. Data from surgical instruments, wearables, and smart devices to monitor sur- 
geon movements and patient vitals can be used to create detailed simulations that mimic real- 
life surgical conditions, allowing trainees to practice and reﬁne their skills in a controlled envi- 
ronment. 
Simulation data. Performance metrics from virtual reality and simulation-based training en- 
vironments can be analyzed to identify areas for improvement, tailor training programs to indi- 
vidual needs, and track progress over time. 
By leveraging these data sources, surgical education can be signiﬁcantly enhanced, providing 
trainees with a comprehensive, data-driven learning experience. Just like others, surgical data 
acquisition should adhere to best practices for gathering high-quality data from various surgical 
and clinical sources. Effective data management strategies are essential for storing, organizing, 
and securing large datasets, ensuring they are accessible for analysis while maintaining patient 
conﬁdentiality. 
Using surgical data to benchmark performance against best practices and standards is essen- 
tial for facilitating continuous improvement. Data-driven feedback can help surgeons understand 
their strengths and areas for development, leading to more effective training and professional 
growth. 125 Implementing learning health systems, where data are continuously analyzed to gen- 
erate new insights, can improve surgical practices in real-time. It is important to avoid data 
misuse by preventing unnecessary competition that could lead to burnout and decreased quality 
of care. Ethical research and innovation should focus on using data to beneﬁt the broader med- 
ical community and patients, ensuring that advancements derived from data analysis directly 
contribute to improved surgical outcomes. 
Responsible data stewardship involves fostering a collaborative environment where data are 
shared among institutions and practitioners, promoting collective improvements in surgical 
practices rather than unhealthy competition. Transparency and accountability are critical; clear 
35 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
guidelines for data use must ensure all stakeholders are aware of how data are collected, ana- 
lyzed, and applied, with oversight from data governance committees to maintain ethical prac- 
tices and compliance with standards. 126 Lastly, informed consent and privacy are critical when 
using patient data for educational purposes. Maintaining rigorous standards for obtaining patient 
consent and protecting their privacy throughout the data lifecycle ensures ethical data use. 127 
The ultimate goal is to ensure that data utilization directly or indirectly beneﬁts patients by 
improving surgical outcomes. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence-powered surgical simulation and virtual reality training 
In 1997, a study involved a blinded evaluator assessing PGY-2 trainees performing a LC by 
grading their performance. 3 Given that the operations were video recorded, the researchers at- 
tempted retrospectively to grade performance using the recordings. However, they quickly dis- 
covered that locating the relevant video clips was exceedingly time-consuming. 128 Additionally, 
the absence of audio and external views hindered their ability to accurately determine the ac- 
tions of the operating surgeon and the assistant, as well as any verbal cues provided. Conse- 
quently, they concluded that video capture without external views and audio recording was nei- 
ther easier nor superior. 
Today, the landscape has transformed signiﬁcantly. Image quality and video capture quality 
has vastly improved, and advanced technologies such as AI now facilitate the selective capture of 
key parts of the operation. Theator Inc. is 1 example of a company operating in this domain. 129 
By the time an LC is completed, AI has already selected the critical video segments, enabling the 
attending surgeon to review these clips with the trainee. Beyond postoperative feedback, AI is 
also being investigated for its potential to guide operative decision-making by overlaying colored 
indicators of safe and dangerous areas for dissection. 130 
Many groups are attempting to store clips as part of the video operative note. Other 
groups have shared video clips on social media like Twitter and Facebook channels. 
The 
Robot Surgery Collaboration has more than 14,0 0 0 surgeons online to opine on uploaded video 
clips. 131 Many believe that the ABS and hospital privileging board will 1 day require operative 
video-based assessments. 132 In principle, AI could learn to select and grade key steps of speciﬁc 
operations. 
As such, the integration of AI in VR and augmented reality (AR) is transforming surgical ed- 
ucation by providing immersive training environments where realistic simulations of surgical 
procedures can be performed in both low and high resource settings. 133 These technologies al- 
low for a heightened sense of realism through haptic feedback and tactile sensations, essential 
for practicing and reﬁning surgical skills. Customizable scenarios with varying levels of diﬃculty 
enable tailored learning experiences, and performance tracking along with real-time feedback 
further enhances the educational value of these simulations. 
AI-powered VR training platforms signiﬁcantly improve operative performance and reduce 
operative times by providing proﬁciency-based training with immediate feedback and on-the- 
spot instructions. This method promotes deliberate practice and enables the rehearsal of pro- 
cedures at varying diﬃculty levels, thereby improving learning outcomes. The incorporation of 
VR training into surgical curricula is being advocated, provided its cost-effectiveness is demon- 
strated. 134 Moreover, AR is increasingly being used to boost surgical visualization and guidance 
through technologies such as ﬂuorescence-guided surgery and innovative imaging devices like 
contrast-enhanced ultrasound and photoacoustic imaging. These advancements offer surgeons 
enhanced visualization of intraoperative anatomy, crucial for precise and safe surgical interven- 
tions. 135 
VR simulators, combined with ML, enable the quantiﬁcation of multiple aspects of surgical 
performance in a safe, controlled environment. Supervised classiﬁers, which use prelabeled data 
to generate predictive models, and unsupervised algorithms, which identify patterns without 
prior labeling, are both utilized to assess and categorize surgical expertise. To standardize and 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
36 
Table 9 
The Machine Learning to Assess Surgical Expertise (MLASE) checklist contains 20 elements, separated into 4 sections. A 
point is awarded for every element completed in the article. The total score is calculated by adding the total number 
of elements checked. 
Section 
Element 
Yes? 
Study design (5 points) 
1. I s relevant literature on the use of artiﬁcial intelligence in 
simulation provided? 
2. Is the sample size clearly stated (including number of groups and 
number of participants in each group)? 
3. Is a deﬁnition of each group of expertise provided? 
4. Is the simulator described? 
5. Are the surgical tasks to be performed outlined? 
Data structure (6 points) 
6. Is raw data acquisition described? 
7. Is feature extraction mentioned? 
8. Is an effort made to normalize the data? 
9. I s feature selection mentioned? 
10. Is the count of features used by the algorithm clearly stated? 
11. Are the ﬁnal selected features clearly described? 
Supervised machine 
learning (5 points) 
12. Is the type of the classiﬁer used mentioned and justiﬁed (either by 
comparing multiple classiﬁers or citing relevant literature)? 
13. Is the mechanism of the classiﬁer explained or is a relevant source 
provided? 
14. Is an effort made to clearly describe the methods used to train and 
test the algorithm? 
15. Is the accuracy of the classiﬁer mentioned? 
16. Is the sensitivity and speciﬁcity mentioned? 
Discussion quality (4 
points) 
17. Are effort s made to explain the educational rationale of the 
features used by the algorithm? 
18. Is the educational application of classiﬁers in the context of 
surgical simulation stated, speciﬁcally its use as a summative or 
formative assessment tool? 
19. Are methodological limitations discussed, including those 
pertaining to any above points? 
20. A re the future directions discussed? 
Total Score = ______/20 
improve the reporting of ML-assisted surgical education studies, a framework known as the Ma- 
chine Learning to Assess Surgical Expertise (MLASE) checklist has been developed. This checklist 
( Table 9 ) ensures the quality and comprehensiveness of research in this ﬁeld by providing clear 
guidelines on study design, data structure, the use of supervised ML, and discussion quality. 136 
In summary, AI-powered virtual reality and augmented reality simulators represent a trans- 
formative advancement in surgical education. By providing immersive, realistic, and customiz- 
able training environments, coupled with the analytical power of machine learning, these tech- 
nologies hold the promise of signiﬁcantly enhancing surgical training and, ultimately, patient 
care. However, addressing the challenges of data privacy, standardization, curriculum integra- 
tion, and ethical considerations will be crucial for their successful implementation and sustained 
impact. 137 
Dr Abby Susk summarized, “Responsible AI and technology governance is something we 
should all care about. I’m concerned about the false dichotomy between developing and de- 
ploying AI responsibly and creating products that are competitive on the market or in the in- 
ternational arena. Responsible AI work ensures that end-users trust that systems will operate 
as promised, have an understanding of how they work, and know that using the system will 
not introduce legal consequences or moral injury. Achieving those outcomes facilitates adoption 
of the AI system by end-users, and is thus essential. People will not leverage a technology that 
they do not trust or understand.”138 
37 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Artiﬁcial intelligence-assisted surgical planning and 3D modeling for procedural 
eﬃciency 
Early efforts to collect data in the operating room include initiatives like the OR Black Box 139 
designed to provide a dependable system for auditing and monitoring intraoperative events and 
practice variations. One particularly innovative advancement aimed at enhancing surgical team- 
work is the preliminary development of an AI coach. This AI coach is designed to infer the 
alignment of mental models within a surgical team. 140 
Multimodal digital inputs, such as physiological data (eg, skin conductance and heart rate 
variability) to identify operative stress, continuous pharmacological and vital signs monitoring 
from anesthesia, and inputs from nursing team staﬃng and equipment availability, can be quan- 
tiﬁed and integrated into a digital pathway for automation and optimization in surgical educa- 
tion. The use of generative AI models incorporating both patient and environmental data in the 
operating room enhances nontechnical skills crucial for surgical trainees, including communica- 
tion, situational awareness, and team functioning. 141 Tracking factors like operative fatigue, mis- 
communication between anesthesiologists and surgeons, staﬃng changeovers, and equipment 
shortages can reduce intraoperative errors. A digitized surgical platform thus holds the potential 
to facilitate an AI-enhanced future in surgical education. 
Case study 1: Osso VR and surgical education 142 
Methods. This prospective, blinded study involved 38 fourth-year medical students with no 
prior experience in tibia intramedullary nail (IMN) surgery. Participants were randomized into 
2 groups: 1 trained using a traditional technique guide and the other using the OSSO VR plat- 
form. The VR module developed by OSSO VR Inc. provided an immersive experience, with au- 
dio, visual, tactile, and proprioceptive feedback, simulating a virtual OR. The participants’ perfor- 
mance was evaluated based on the time to completion of the mock surgery and the number of 
corrections needed. A blinded observer used the Global Assessment 5-point Rating Scale and a 
Procedure-Speciﬁc Checklist to objectively grade the participants. 
Evaluation of skills. Participants in the VR group completed the mock surgery in signiﬁcantly 
less time (9.6 minutes vs. 12.2 minutes, P = 0.034) and required fewer corrections (2.2 vs. 2.5; 
P = 0.05) compared to the traditional group. The VR training also improved the participants’ pro- 
ﬁciency in the steps of the tibia IMN procedure, indicating a better overall understanding and 
execution of the surgical technique. 
Results. The study found trends in favor of the VR group across most categories. Although 
some differences in metrics did not reach statistical signiﬁcance, the VR group consistently out- 
performed the traditional group in key areas such as time to completion and the number of 
procedural corrections. The improved performance in VR training suggests that it may offer a 
more effective method for surgical education, particularly in learning complex procedures like 
tibia IMN surgery. 
Discussion. The results indicate that VR training can enhance surgical proﬁciency by pro- 
viding an immersive, interactive learning environment that replicates the OR experience. This 
method allows trainees to practice and reﬁne their skills in a risk-free setting, potentially reduc- 
ing the learning curve and improving patient outcomes. The study highlights the potential of VR 
to augment traditional surgical training, offering a valuable tool for medical educators. However, 
the study also acknowledges limitations, such as the small sample size and the use of medical 
students rather than surgical residents. Future research should explore the long-term retention 
of skills acquired through VR training and its impact on actual surgical performance and patient 
outcomes. 
Conclusion. VR, exempliﬁed by OSSO VR, presents a promising training modality for orthope- 
dic trauma surgery. The study demonstrates that VR training can enhance surgical skills, reduce 
procedure times, and decrease the need for corrections, suggesting its potential to improve sur- 
gical education and patient care. Further research with larger cohorts and long-term follow-up 
is warranted to fully establish the eﬃcacy of VR in surgical training. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
38 
Artiﬁcial intelligence for skill acquisition and retention 
In this section we explore dynamic scenario generation, intelligent tutoring systems, adaptive 
learning, and personalized surgical education, highlighting their roles in modernizing surgical 
training. 
Dynamic scenario generation involves creating realistic and varied training scenarios that 
simulate the complexity and unpredictability of real-life surgical situations. High-ﬁdelity sim- 
ulations using VR and AR provide immersive environments that closely mimic actual surgical 
procedures. These scenarios expose trainees to a wide range of surgical challenges, including rare 
and complex cases, thereby improving their decision-making and problem-solving skills. Imme- 
diate feedback from these simulations allows trainees to learn from their mistakes and reﬁne 
their techniques in a risk-free environment. Carla Pugh’s work involves integrating VR into sur- 
gical training to create immersive, interactive learning environments. Her research utilizes haptic 
feedback systems to simulate the tactile sensations of real surgical procedures, allowing trainees 
to develop a sense of touch and pressure that is crucial for surgical proﬁciency. 143 Pugh’s VR 
simulations using sensor technology are designed to adapt dynamically to the trainee’s actions, 
providing a realistic and engaging training experience. 144 , 145 For example, in a VR simulation of 
laparoscopic surgery, the system can simulate variations in tissue resistance and bleeding, requir- 
ing the trainee to adapt their technique accordingly. 145 These simulators offer realistic training 
scenarios and track performance over time, helping trainees maintain their surgical skills. 146 
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) are automated teaching platforms that offer individualized 
performance feedback using advanced technologies such as machine learning and AI. 147 These 
systems deconstruct psychomotor skills into teachable metrics, providing speciﬁc, actionable 
feedback on various aspects of surgical performance. By leveraging large datasets, ITS can dif- 
ferentiate levels of surgical expertise and track progress over time, helping trainees understand 
their strengths and areas for improvement. This continuous, iterative practice with decreasing 
reliance on human supervision enhances trainees’ skills through repeated exposure to complex 
tasks. 
Case study 2: intelligent tutoring systems 148 
One of the most groundbreaking implementations of ITS in surgical education is the Virtual 
Operative Assistant (VOA), developed for neurosurgical training. The VOA represents a signiﬁcant 
advancement in how neurosurgical skills are taught, providing a detailed, data-driven approach 
to skill acquisition and assessment. 
Development and implementation. The VOA integrates advanced ML algorithms and VR tech- 
nology to create an immersive training environment. Developed at the Neurosurgical Simulation 
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Learning Centre at McGill University, the system was designed to ad- 
dress the complex needs of neurosurgical education. Neurosurgery requires precise, ﬁne motor 
skills and deep anatomical knowledge, making it an ideal setting for high-ﬁdelity simulation and 
intelligent tutoring. 
Functionality and features. The VOA system deconstructs complex neurosurgical procedures 
into discrete, teachable components. It uses VR to simulate the operative environment, allowing 
trainees to interact with hyper-realistic anatomical models and surgical tools. The ML algorithms 
analyze the trainee’s movements and decisions in real time, providing immediate feedback on 
performance. 
Key features of the VOA include: 
(1) Hyper-realistic simulations . The VR environment mimics the tactile and visual feedback of 
real surgical procedures, enhancing the realism of the training experience. 
(2) Detailed performance metrics . The system tracks a wide range of metrics, including hand 
movements, tool usage, and procedural accuracy. These metrics are used to provide de- 
tailed, personalized feedback to the trainee. 
39 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
(3) Adaptive learning pathways . Based on the performance data, the VOA adapts the training 
modules to focus on areas where the trainee needs improvement. This ensures a tailored 
learning experience that evolves with the trainee’s skill level. 
(4) Automated feedback . The VOA provides immediate, data-driven feedback on technical per- 
formance, allowing trainees to make adjustments and improve their skills continuously. 
Educational impact. The introduction of the VOA has had a profound impact on neurosur- 
gical training. Studies conducted at McGill University have shown that trainees using the VOA 
demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements in technical skills compared to those using traditional 
training methods. The system’s ability to provide objective, standardized assessments has also 
been praised for reducing variability in skill evaluation. 
Speciﬁc educational beneﬁts include: 
(1) Enhanced skill acquisition . Trainees are able to practice complex procedures repeatedly in 
a risk-free environment, leading to faster and more effective skill acquisition. 
(2) Objective assessments . The data-driven feedback provided by the VOA offers an objective 
measure of technical proﬁciency, reducing reliance on subjective evaluations by human 
instructors. 
(3) Increased conﬁdence . By allowing trainees to practice and perfect their skills before per- 
forming actual operations, the VOA helps build conﬁdence and reduces anxiety associated 
with high-stakes procedures. 
Integration into training programs. The successful integration of the VOA into neurosurgi- 
cal training programs requires dedicated learning centers equipped with the necessary VR and 
computing infrastructure. At McGill University, a dedicated simulation lab has been established, 
providing trainees with access to the VOA and other advanced simulation tools. This laboratory 
is designed to facilitate iterative practice and continuous skill development, with minimal need 
for direct supervision by faculty. 
Challenges and considerations. Although the VOA represents a signiﬁcant advancement in 
surgical education, its implementation is not without challenges. The development and main- 
tenance of such sophisticated systems require substantial ﬁnancial investment. Ensuring the 
system’s integration with existing training curricula and obtaining buy-in from educators and 
trainees are also critical steps. Additionaly, addressing ethical and privacy concerns related to 
data collection and usage is paramount. 
The VOA exempliﬁes the transformative potential of intelligent tutoring systems in neuro- 
surgical training. By providing realistic simulations, detailed performance metrics, and adaptive 
learning pathways, the VOA enhances the educational experience and prepares trainees for the 
complexities of real-world surgery. As technology continues to advance, tools like the VOA will 
play an increasingly vital role in shaping the future of surgical education, ensuring that the next 
generation of surgeons is well-equipped to deliver high-quality patient care. 
Adaptive learning technologies customize educational content based on the learner’s perfor- 
mance, ensuring that training is both eﬃcient and effective. AI algorithms tailor training mod- 
ules to address individual needs, focusing on areas where the trainee requires more practice. The 
system dynamically adjusts the diﬃculty and focus of training exercises in real time, promoting 
optimal learning outcomes. This scalable solution can be applied across various levels of surgi- 
cal education, from novice to expert, ensuring that each trainee receives the appropriate level 
of challenge and support. Hung and colleagues conducted longitudinal studies to track surgi- 
cal trainees’ performance over time. By collecting data from multiple procedures, they analyzed 
trends and patterns to understand skill development and retention. 149 , 150 , 151 Their AI-powered 
predictive models forecasted a trainee’s future performance based on past data. These models 
helped identify when a trainee might need additional training to prevent skill degradation, en- 
suring continuous improvement and maintenance of surgical skills. 
Personalized surgical education aims to cater to the unique learning needs of each trainee, 
enhancing his/her overall educational experience. This involves developing customized training 
plans that align with the trainee’s goals, strengths, and areas for improvement. Access to men- 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
40 
tors and experienced surgeons who provide guidance, support, and feedback is crucial through- 
out the training process. Personalized education focuses not only on technical skills but also on 
nontechnical skills such as communication, teamwork, and leadership, ensuring holistic devel- 
opment. 
To support this personalized approach, software applications developed speciﬁcally for use 
on small, wireless devices, like smartphones and tablets, can provide cognitive skills training 
through simulation apps. Examples include iLappSurgery, Touch Surgery, and Think Like A Sur- 
geon. 152 These apps offer interactive and accessible platforms for trainees to practice and reﬁne 
their skills anytime and anywhere, further enhancing the ﬂexibility and effectiveness of their 
surgical education. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence in intraoperative guidance and assistance 
Identiﬁcation of anatomical structures and object recognition 
Multimodal AI interrogation of the surgical ﬁeld signiﬁcantly aids in identifying relevant and 
aberrant anatomy, enhancing the surgeon’s visual assessments, determining the necessity for 
biopsies, and evaluating malignancy risks. 103 Additionally, the beneﬁts of AI in hypothetico- 
deductive surgical decision-making are well-documented. 153 Many groups across the world have 
successfully developed algorithms that identify anatomic surgical objects in the ﬁeld and sur- 
geon gestures using CV technologies. 154 , 155 , 156 Some of the key contributions in the ﬁeld are 
recognized below. 
The AI-powered surgical training program at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, being 
developed by Associate Professor Usman Roshan and collaborators, exempliﬁes the utility of such 
advancements in surgical education. This program uses CV to analyze live video feeds of surgical 
exercises, offering immediate, personalized feedback. It aims to enhance the training process by 
reducing the need for constant supervision and manual feedback, with plans for integration into 
surgical curricula by 2025. 157 
Key studies and applications 
AI for predicting surgical events . A study by Ward and colleagues explored the use of AI to 
predict intraoperative events during cholecystectomy. 115 The AI model analyzed surgical videos 
to identify patterns indicative of potential complications, showing promise in predicting adverse 
events, thereby allowing surgeons to take preemptive measures to mitigate risks. 
Automated recognition of surgical steps . Hashimoto and colleagues developed an AI sys- 
tem capable of recognizing surgical steps in real-time during laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. 158 
The model utilized DL algorithms to accurately classify each step of the procedure, enhancing 
intraoperative workﬂow and providing real-time feedback to surgeons. 
AI for anatomical landmark identiﬁcation . Tokuyasu and colleagues created an AI system 
using DL to identify anatomical landmarks during LC. 159 This system signiﬁcantly improved the 
identiﬁcation of critical structures, reducing the likelihood of accidental damage and improving 
surgical precision. 
Assessment of the critical view of safety (CVS) . Mascagni and colleagues introduced a com- 
puter vision platform that automatically assesses the CVS during LC. 160 The AI model evaluated 
the CVS, a crucial step to ensure the correct identiﬁcation of the cystic duct and artery, thus 
preventing bile duct injuries. The system provided real-time feedback, helping surgeons achieve 
and verify the CVS more reliably. 
Object detection tasks . DL models output bounding boxes and labels for individual objects 
within images. 161 This technology is also useful in medical ﬁelds such as polyp detection during 
colonoscopy, where it has the potential to reduce human error. In surgery, AI-assisted surgical 
41 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
instrument detection has been reported, where kinematic information about a surgeon can be 
utilized for workﬂow recognition and skill assessment. 162 Intraoperative tracking of surgical in- 
struments is a prerequisite for computer- and robotic-assisted interventions, and object detection 
approaches can effectively extract such data. 
Overall, AI-driven systems are increasingly being integrated into operating rooms to assist 
surgeons in real time. These systems leverage CV and ML algorithms to analyze surgical videos, 
identify anatomical structures, and provide actionable insights during procedures. 163 The pri- 
mary goals are to enhance situational awareness, support decision-making, and minimize errors. 
By utilizing these advanced technologies, surgical education and training programs can signiﬁ- 
cantly improve, providing trainees with immediate feedback and fostering a deeper understand- 
ing of complex surgical procedures. 
Case study 3: GoNoGoNet 130 , 164 
Introduction . LC carries a risk of bile duct injuries, which can result in signiﬁcant morbidity. 
Such injuries often occur due to misinterpretation of anatomical landmarks during surgery, ex- 
acerbated by inﬂammation or aberrant anatomy. AI, particularly deep learning models, offers the 
potential to augment the surgeon’s mental model by providing real-time guidance to minimize 
these risks. The GoNoGoNet, is a CV algorithm designed to identify anatomical structures and 
delineate safe ("Go") and dangerous ("No-Go") zones during surgeries. This case study explores 
the development, implementation, and impact of GoNoGoNet in LC. 
Development process . GoNoGoNet is a convolutional neural network (CNN) speciﬁcally 
trained to identify Go and No-Go zones during LC. The development process involved: 
(1) Data collection . The training dataset comprised 308 anonymized LC videos from 37 coun- 
tries, involving 153 surgeons and 136 institutions. The videos included various conditions 
such as acute and chronic cholecystitis and required lysis of adhesions, providing a com- 
prehensive dataset for training the AI model. 
(2) Annotation process . Expert surgeons annotated the videos to mark the Go and No-Go 
zones, liver, gallbladder, and hepatocystic triangle. These annotations were used as ground 
truth to train the AI model. The annotations aimed to delineate areas safe for dissection 
(Go zones) and areas where dissection could result in bile duct injuries (No-Go zones). 
(3) Model training and validation . The AI model underwent rigorous training using a tenfold 
cross-validation technique. This method ensured that the model’s performance was robust 
and generalizable. The primary metrics for evaluating the model’s performance included 
the Intersection-Over-Union (IOU) and F1 score, which measure the spatial overlap and 
accuracy of the predicted zones compared to expert annotations. 
Performance metrics. The evaluation of GoNoGoNet demonstrated promising results: 
(1) For Go zones, the model achieved a mean accuracy of 0.94 and speciﬁcity of 0.94, indi- 
cating a high likelihood of correctly identifying safe areas for dissection. For No-Go zones, 
the accuracy was 0.95, with a sensitivity of 0.80, reﬂecting the model’s effectiveness in 
identifying dangerous areas to avoid. 
(2) The mean IOU for Go zones was 0.53, and for No-Go zones, it was 0.71. The F1 scores 
were 0.70 for Go zones and 0.83 for No-Go zones, indicating a good spatial correlation 
between the AI predictions and expert annotations. 
(3) The model’s inference time was less than 0.01 seconds per frame, satisfying real-time 
requirements and making it feasible for intraoperative guidance. 
Impact on surgical practice. GoNoGoNet’s ability to provide real-time visual cues has several 
implications for surgical practice: 
(1) Enhanced decision-making . By clearly marking safe and dangerous zones, GoNoGoNet aids 
surgeons in making informed decisions during dissection, potentially reducing the inci- 
dence of bile duct injuries. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
42 
(2) Training and education . The algorithm serves as a valuable tool for surgical training, help- 
ing novice surgeons understand and visualize critical anatomical structures and safe dis- 
section zones. This can enhance their learning curve and improve overall surgical proﬁ- 
ciency. 
(3) Patient safety . The use of GoNoGoNet can lead to improved patient outcomes by minimiz- 
ing surgical complications, thus enhancing the overall safety and eﬃcacy of LC. 
Conclusion. GoNoGoNet represents a signiﬁcant advancement in the application of AI for in- 
traoperative decision-making and surgical education. Its ability to accurately identify anatomical 
structures and delineate safe and dangerous zones during LC demonstrates its potential to aug- 
ment surgical performance and improve patient safety. As AI technology continues to evolve, the 
integration of such tools in surgical practice is likely to become increasingly prevalent, offering 
new possibilities for enhancing surgical outcomes and education. 
Objective evaluation of surgical performance using artiﬁcial intelligence 
Traditional methods of assessing surgical skills often rely on expert opinion, which can be 
subjective, time-consuming, and costly. AI offers a solution by providing automated, objective, 
and consistent assessments. A systematic review by Pedrett and colleagues demonstrates the ef- 
fectiveness of AI in evaluating technical skills in minimally invasive surgery. 165 The review ana- 
lyzed 50 studies that employed AI models to assess surgical performance using motion data from 
surgical videos and kinematic data from robotic systems. These models, predominantly utilizing 
deep learning techniques, showed high accuracy in predicting skill levels in simulated environ- 
ments. 
The Johnson and Johnson Crowd-Sourced Assessment of Technical Skills (C-SATS) 166 is a 
video-based surgical assessment platform designed to improve surgical proﬁciency. It provides 
performance analytics, self-learning opportunities, and peer-to-peer interactions. Surgeons can 
upload their surgical videos to receive AI-powered insights, expert feedback, and crowd-sourced 
quantitative reviews. The platform supports continuous improvement by offering personalized 
feedback, tracking performance trends, and facilitating knowledge sharing among surgeons. C- 
SATS aims to enhance surgical skills, reduce operative risks, and ultimately improve patient out- 
comes. 
Surgical Autonomy Program (SAP) 167 developed at the Duke University Department of Neu- 
rosurgery, uses a responsive web application to assess surgical competence, provide feedback, 
and visualize progress for surgical trainees in real-time. It is based on Vygotsky’s Social Learning 
Theory and utilizes a TAGS scale for competency-based surgical education. 
The Ethicon AI-powered Laparoscopic Skills Training Platform 168 integrates AR and AI to en- 
hance laparoscopic surgical training. It offers real-time data, tactile feedback, and personalized 
learning experiences, allowing surgeons to hone essential skills through intelligent assessments 
and feedback. Surgical AI Trainer 169 evaluates surgeons’ techniques using AI to analyze videos of 
real-life surgeries. It generates interactive reports that highlight skill gaps and provide targeted 
feedback to improve surgical outcomes. Developed by Dani Kiyasseh and his team, it focuses 
on making performance evaluations more accessible and effective. These platforms leverage ad- 
vanced technologies like AI, AR, and video analysis to provide objective and actionable feedback, 
aiming to enhance surgical training and improve patient outcomes. 
Postoperative performance analysis 
AI-based systems for postoperative performance analysis typically involve the use of CV and 
ML algorithms to process and evaluate surgical videos. One prominent example is the Surgical 
AI System 170 (SAIS), developed by researchers at Caltech and Keck Medicine of the University of 
Southern California. SAIS uses AI to provide surgeons with real-time, objective feedback on their 
43 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
performance by analyzing surgical videos. It utilizes a combination of RGB frames and optical 
ﬂow data to capture both spatial and temporal aspects of surgical activity. The spatial features 
are extracted using a vision transformer pretrained on large datasets like ImageNet, while the 
temporal relationships between frames are captured through an attention mechanism that high- 
lights the most relevant frames for skill assessment. 
To enhance the reliability of these assessments, the SAIS incorporates a module called Train- 
ing With Explanations (TWIX). 171 , 172 This module uses human-generated explanations as a su- 
pervisory signal to train the AI system, ensuring that the AI’s focus aligns with expert evalu- 
ations. The training process involves annotating video samples with segments of time deemed 
important for skill assessments based on a predeﬁned set of criteria. These annotations guide 
the AI system in learning to identify and emphasize critical moments in the surgical procedure 
that reﬂect the surgeon’s skill level. By integrating human expertise into the training process, 
TWIX improves the accuracy and fairness of the AI-generated feedback. 
The implementation of AI systems like SAIS for postoperative performance analysis has 
demonstrated signiﬁcant improvements in the accuracy and reliability of surgical skill assess- 
ments. Studies have shown that AI-based explanations often align closely with human expert 
evaluations, providing consistent and actionable feedback to surgeons. For instance, in the as- 
sessment of needle handling and needle driving skills during surgical procedures, SAIS enhanced 
with TWIX achieved higher accuracy and reliability compared to assessments without the TWIX 
module. The precision-recall curves indicated that the AI-generated explanations were not only 
reliable but also reduced the variability in assessments across different surgeon subcohorts. 
Moreover, the use of AI for performance analysis has proven effective in identifying and mit- 
igating biases in feedback. In traditional assessments, biases can arise due to subjective judg- 
ments and inconsistencies in evaluations. However, AI systems trained with TWIX have shown 
a marked reduction in explanation bias, ensuring that feedback is equally reliable for novice 
and experienced surgeons. This equitable feedback is crucial for maintaining a fair and effective 
training environment, where all surgeons have the opportunity to improve their skills based on 
objective and consistent evaluations. 
Several case studies highlight the practical applications and beneﬁts of AI-driven postoper- 
ative performance analysis. For example, the implementation of SAIS in multiple hospitals, in- 
cluding the University of Southern California, St. Antonius Hospital in Germany, and Houston 
Methodist Hospital, demonstrated its effectiveness in diverse clinical settings. 172 The system’s 
ability to generalize across different hospitals and maintain high reliability in skill assessments 
underscores its potential for widespread adoption. These case studies also revealed that AI-based 
assessments could provide detailed feedback on speciﬁc aspects of surgical performance, such as 
the smoothness of needle driving or the precision of tissue handling, which are critical for sur- 
gical success. 
In training environments, AI systems are being used to provide real-time feedback to surgi- 
cal trainees. For instance, medical students practicing suturing techniques on gel models of the 
bladder and urethra received feedback from SAIS, which closely aligned with expert evaluations. 
This real-time, AI-generated feedback helped trainees identify areas for improvement and re- 
ﬁne their techniques more effectively than traditional training methods. The ability to provide 
consistent and detailed feedback regardless of the trainee’s location or the availability of expert 
mentors makes AI an invaluable tool in modern surgical education. 
Robotic surgery and artiﬁcial intelligence-assisted guidance 
Intraoperative enhancements 
AI plays a pivotal role in enhancing intraoperative procedures, particularly through real-time 
image enhancement techniques. AI algorithms are employed to process and improve the qual- 
ity of intraoperative images, facilitating better visualization of anatomical structures and surgical 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
44 
instruments. For example, an online preprocessing framework for knee arthroscopy has been de- 
veloped, incorporating denoising, deblurring, and color-correcting of real-time camera imaging, 
which signiﬁcantly enhances the clarity of the surgical ﬁeld. 173 Another innovative application 
utilizes CNN combined with transformers to remove surgical smoke, ensuring a clear view dur- 
ing procedures that involve electrocautery. 174 
Native tissue recognition 
AI is also enhancing the capabilities of surgical robots in tissue identiﬁcation and differenti- 
ation. For instance, deep learning models developed by Kumazu and colleagues 175 can segment 
loose connective tissue ﬁbers to establish safe dissection planes during robot-assisted gastrec- 
tomy, thereby reducing the risk of damaging critical structures. In surgical oncology, AI models 
utilizing ﬁber-based ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging generate heat maps indicating probable can- 
cer locations, aiding surgeons in performing more precise tumor excisions. 176 These advance- 
ments in tissue recognition are particularly vital for procedures like brain tumor removal, where 
accurately distinguishing between malignant and healthy tissue is crucial for successful out- 
comes. 177 
Tactile feedback and instrument delineation 
One of the challenges in robotic surgery is the absence of tactile feedback, a critical compo- 
nent in traditional open surgery. Recent advancements have introduced haptic feedback mech- 
anisms that give surgeons a sense of touch. For instance, systems providing vibratory feedback 
to simulate tissue resistance have been shown to reduce the force exerted during surgical tasks, 
thereby preventing tissue damage. 178 Additionally, AI-enhanced instrument delineation plays a 
crucial role in accurately identifying and differentiating sur gical instruments within the opera- 
tive ﬁeld. This capability is particularly important for augmented reality applications in surgery, 
where precise overlay of digital information on the surgical ﬁeld can greatly assist the sur- 
geon. 179 
Stepwise automation 
AI is signiﬁcantly advancing intraoperative procedures by automating speciﬁc surgical tasks 
and reducing the physical and cognitive workload on surgeons. One notable development is the 
creation of algorithms for autonomous camera control in the da Vinci surgical system. These al- 
gorithms optimize camera positioning and zoom levels based on the surgical context, thereby 
improving visualization and eﬃciency during surgery. 180 Further advancements include the au- 
tomation of suturing tasks, where AI models guide the robotic system through the complex steps 
of surgical suturing. This signiﬁcantly enhances eﬃciency and precision, as seen in fully auto- 
mated laparoscopic bowel anastomoses using CNNs coupled with U-Net algorithms, representing 
a signiﬁcant leap towards higher levels of surgical automation. 181 
Skill assessment to improve education 
In a study conducted by Fard and colleagues 182 8 global movement features were collected 
from surgeons with varying robotic experience while performing 2 minimally invasive surgical 
tasks using the da Vinci robot. Kinematic data from both hands during surgical knot tying and 
suturing was analyzed, and global rating scores were created to group the surgeons into 2 skill 
45 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
levels: novice and expert. Three different ML techniques for classiﬁcation were applied to au- 
tomatically predict robotic surgical skill level. The quantitative metrics were found to be the 
most relevant for correct classiﬁcation and the predictive model was able to correctly classify 
surgeons with 82.3% and 89.9% accuracy for knot tying and suturing, respectively. 
In another study, Lavanchy and colleagues 183 developed a multi-stage ML algorithm to auto- 
mate surgical skill assessment using video footage of LC procedures. Good surgical performance 
was determined by narrow and focused instrument handling within the operating ﬁeld and poor 
surgical performance was indicated by frequent changes of instrument direction within a larger 
ﬁeld. With an 87% accuracy, this novel method was able to identify and analyze the movement 
pattern of surgical tools to distinguish good and poor surgical performance. 
Technology and global surgical education 
Low ﬁdelity simulations for low- and middle-income countries 
Over the past decade, the development of AR/VR in surgery has predominantly focused on 
high-income settings, often neglecting more affordable applications, especially for VR. AR de- 
velopment has also required substantial network connectivity and ﬁnancial resources for data 
storage and transfer. Additionally, VR advancements have primarily addressed the needs of high- 
income countries, where open procedures are less common. Consequently, VR has not been 
adapted for open procedures, which are still prevalent in cancer operations within resource- 
constrained settings. Major surgical and cancer surgery commissions have highlighted that the 
most signiﬁcant gaps in global surgery disproportionately affect the poorest countries. 
Researchers developed a low-ﬁdelity VR surgical simulation model to enhance surgical on- 
cology capacity in low-resource settings. 184 The team used commercially available technology, 
including standard VR software and Oculus Rift hardware, to create a cost-effective and immer- 
sive training environment. The VR system was designed to replicate an operating room in a 1:1 
scale, incorporating detailed models of surgical instruments and internal anatomy. This setup al- 
lowed for realistic simulations of surgical procedures, speciﬁcally focusing on radical abdominal 
hysterectomy for cervical cancer. The visuals maintained a frame rate greater than 60 frames 
per second to ensure high visual ﬁdelity and immersion. Training modules were co-designed 
by experts in various ﬁelds, including learning sciences, human behavior, VR, and gynecologic 
oncology, to ensure the simulation was both educationally effective and engaging. 
The results demonstrated that this low-cost VR simulation could effectively prepare novice 
surgeons for complex surgical procedures. The simulation was tested for its ability to acceler- 
ate the acquisition of surgical skills, with participants showing signiﬁcant improvement in their 
technical proﬁciency. By using this VR model, the researchers were able to reduce the time and 
cost associated with traditional surgical training methods. The simulation’s potential for scal- 
ability and adaptability makes it a promising tool for increasing surgical oncology capacity in 
low- and middle-income countries, where access to advanced surgical training is often limited. 
If validated in real-world clinical trials, this approach could signiﬁcantly impact global surgical 
education and training, particularly in resource-limited settings. 
Julian Varas and his team developed a low-cost, Objective Structured Clinical Examination 
(OSCE) scenario for training surgical skills in trauma surgery. 185 The method involved creating 
5 simulation-based stations: bowel anastomosis, vascular anastomosis, penetrating lung injury, 
penetrating cardiac injury, and gastric perforation (laparoscopic suturing). These stations used 
ex vivo porcine models and commercially available simulation tools. The training was conducted 
over a 3-day boot camp with 75 participants, including surgical residents and recently graduated 
surgeons from various programs. Each procedure was videotaped and assessed by experts using 
a modiﬁed Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills (OSATS) and a task-speciﬁc rating 
scale (SRS). Additionally, participants’ self-conﬁdence was evaluated before and after the training 
using a Likert-type survey. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
46 
The results showed signiﬁcant improvements in participants’ technical skills and self- 
conﬁdence across all stations. Statistically signiﬁcant increases in both OSATS and SRS scores 
were observed post-training, particularly in the cardiac and pulmonary stations where initial 
pretraining scores were the lowest. Interestingly, the time to complete procedures increased for 
pulmonary tractotomy, bowel anastomosis, and vascular anastomosis stations, indicating a learn- 
ing curve effect where participants took more time to perform the procedures accurately. Con- 
versely, time for bleeding control and ventricular repair in the cardiac injury station decreased 
signiﬁcantly, reﬂecting improved eﬃciency. The study highlighted the effectiveness of this OSCE- 
based training program in enhancing trauma surgical skills, particularly in low-resource settings, 
and suggested the need for early incorporation of simulation-based tools in surgical residency 
programs to better prepare surgeons for high-stakes trauma scenarios. 
In another study researchers developed cost-effective, low-ﬁdelity surgical simulation models 
to enhance pediatric surgical training in low-resource settings. 186 The models created include 
neonatal bowel anastomosis, duodenoduodenostomy for discrepancy anastomosis, gastrostomy, 
and pyeloplasty. These models were constructed using animal tissue sourced from local abat- 
toirs and basic surgical instruments. The simplicity and low cost (each model costing less than 
$10) make these simulations accessible and reproducible in resource-limited healthcare environ- 
ments. 
The methods involved detailed steps for each surgical procedure. For example, the bowel 
anastomosis model used bisected segments of sheep intestine to simulate the procedure, while 
the duodenoduodenostomy model employed half a sheep bladder and a segment of sheep bowel 
to replicate the surgery. These models were utilized in 9 courses run by the International Affairs 
Committee of the British Association of Pediatric Surgeons across Africa since 2008. The suc- 
cess of these models in training sessions indicates their potential to provide sustainable train- 
ing programs that enhance surgical skills and improve patient care in low- and middle-income 
countries. 
The results of implementing these low-ﬁdelity models showed signiﬁcant promise in improv- 
ing the practical skills of surgical trainees. The models provided a valuable training tool that 
could be easily integrated into existing programs, ensuring that trainees gain essential surgical 
skills despite limited resources. The study underscores the importance of accessible and cost- 
effective training solutions to address the global need for competent surgical care, particularly 
in settings where high-ﬁdelity simulations are not feasible due to ﬁnancial and logistical con- 
straints. 
Telemedicine 
Telemedicine has revolutionized various aspects of health care, and its impact on surgical 
training and education has been particularly signiﬁcant. 187 By leveraging technology to bridge 
geographical gaps, telemedicine provides surgical trainees with access to expert guidance, real- 
time feedback, and immersive learning experiences regardless of their location. 
Remote mentoring and telementoring 
Telemedicine facilitates remote mentoring, where experienced surgeons guide trainees 
through surgical procedures in real time using video conferencing and augmented reality. 188 
This approach allows trainees to perform operations with expert oversight, reducing the risk 
of errors and enhancing learning outcomes. Telementoring has been particularly beneﬁcial in 
resource-limited settings where access to specialized surgical expertise is limited. Previously de- 
scribed platforms like C-SATS 166 use telemedicine to allow peer reviews and expert evaluations 
of surgical videos, providing valuable feedback to trainees. 
47 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Continuing medical education (CME) 
Telemedicine supports CME by providing access to online courses, webinars, and virtual con- 
ferences. 189 Surgeons can stay updated with the latest advancements in surgical techniques and 
technologies through these platforms, ensuring lifelong learning and professional development. 
The ACS offers telemedicine-based CME programs to enhance the knowledge and skills of prac- 
ticing surgeons. 190 
Several studies and initiatives have demonstrated the effectiveness of telemedicine in en- 
hancing surgical training and education. A study evaluated the use of telementoring in laparo- 
scopic surgery. 191 The researchers used telemedicine to connect trainees with expert mentors 
who provided real-time guidance during surgeries. The study reported signiﬁcant improvements 
in the trainees’ performance and a reduction in procedural errors, demonstrating the eﬃcacy of 
telementoring in surgical training. Additionally, the Global Initiative for Children’s Surgery has 
implemented telemedicine-based training programs in low-resource settings. 192 These programs 
use telemedicine to deliver lectures, conduct workshops, and provide hands-on training through 
remote mentoring. The initiative has successfully trained numerous pediatric surgeons in devel- 
oping countries, improving surgical care for children worldwide. 
Research consistently shows that telemedicine enhances surgical training by providing access 
to expert knowledge, reducing the learning curve for complex procedures, and improving sur- 
gical outcomes. Trainees beneﬁt from real-time feedback, increased exposure to diverse cases, 
and the ability to practice in a risk-free environment. Telemedicine reduces the costs associated 
with traditional surgical training, such as travel and accommodation expenses for trainees and 
trainers. By delivering training remotely, telemedicine ensures that high-quality education is ac- 
cessible to a broader audience, including those in underserved regions. Studies have shown that 
telemedicine-based training leads to better retention of surgical skills. 189 , 191 The use of simula- 
tions and repetitive practice under expert supervision helps trainees internalize techniques and 
develop muscle memory, leading to long-term competency. 
Importance of global multidisciplinary partnerships 
The integration of AI into global surgical practices necessitates a comprehensive and col- 
laborative approach. Multiple stakeholders, each with distinct perspectives and responsibilities, 
shape this process. 193 Policymakers provide essential governance, ensuring AI interventions align 
with global health care goals. Health care professionals—surgeons, nurses, technicians—are at 
the forefront, integrating AI tools and advocating for patient needs. Local community organiza- 
tions, including faith-based groups, can provide vital cultural perspectives and build trust during 
implementation. Central to these efforts are the patients themselves, whose experiences and 
feedback ensure that AI remains patient centric. Tech developers and researchers pioneer AI ad- 
vancements, while industry partners bridge the gap between innovative solutions and real-world 
applications. By providing necessary resources, fostering collaborations, and ensuring market ac- 
cess, they ensure that AI tools reach the regions and populations that need them the most. These 
stakeholders form the backbone of the AI surgical ecosystem, and incentivizing their alignment 
is paramount. 
An example of exceptional collaboration is evident at Rutgers University, where a unique ini- 
tiative called the Simulation Collaborative Advancing Research Learning Education and Technol- 
ogy (SCARLET) has been launched. This model aims to consolidate simulation effort s across the 
university’s expansive footprint, including the New Jersey Medical School ( Figs. 21 , 22 ), Robert 
Wood Johnson Medical School, and the Rutgers Dental and Nursing schools. The collaborative’s 
speciﬁc goals are to advance multidisciplinary health professions simulation, minimize duplica- 
tive effort s, st andardize educational initiatives, and f oster research development. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
48 
Fig. 21. An attending surgeon teaching a medical student in the Year 1 Module 7 - Venipuncture and Peripheral IV 
from the American College of Surgeons/Association for Surgical Education (ACS/ASE) Medical Student Simulation-Based 
Surgical Skills Curriculum. 
Fig. 22. Students learning minimally invasive surgery skills at the Rutgers New Jersey Medical School Basic Skills Lab. 
49 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
Conclusions 
There has been a tipping point over the last 2 decades regarding simulation. It is no longer 
acceptable to practice on patients or sacriﬁce animals to learn our craft when a model, simulator, 
or VR is an available option. Since the ﬁrst publication in Current Problems in Surgery , simulation 
has moved from being a luxury of a relatively few medical schools to a standard for teaching and 
learning. Surgical educators have adopted simulation to teach basic skills and nontechnical skills 
in a safe learning environment. This monograph has reviewed the use of models, video trainers, 
simulation, and virtuVR simulators ( Fig 20 ). We have introduced the role of AI to enhance the 
realism of simulation, facilitate training, guide decision-making, and improve patient safety. 
As medicine advances and procedures become increasingly complex and novel, opportuni- 
ties for repetitious training as a resident are limited. AI offers a technology-focused solution 
that gives surgeons an opportunity to test their abilities in performing new techniques while re- 
ceiving real-time, objective feedback, in a controlled and accessible environment. However, the 
incorporation of AI into the existing training modalities is still a new endeavor and we currently 
have limited published data and limited curricula. Increasing the use of AI will provide more ex- 
posure for surgical trainees to practice and receive guidance on how to improve their procedural 
skills which will ultimately prepare them better for independent surgical practice. 
References 
1. Tsuda S, Scott D, Doyle J, Jones DB. Surgical skills training and simulation. In Ashley SW, Creswell LL (ed), Current 
Problems in Surgery 46(4):271–370, 2009. 
2. Hamilton EC , Scott DJ , Kapoor A , et al. Improving operative performance using a laparoscopic hernia simulator. Am 
J Surg . 2001;182:725–728 . 
3. Scott DJ , Bergen PC , Rege RV , et al. Laparoscopic training on bench models: better and more cost effective than 
operating room experience? J Am College Surg . 20 0 0;191(3):272–283 . 
4. Korndorffer JR , Clayton JL , Tesfay S , et al. Multicenter construct validity for Southwestern laparoscopic video trainer 
stations. J Surg Res . 2005;128(1):114–119 . 
5. Hamilton EC , Scott DJ , Fleming JB , et al. Comparison of video trainer and virtual reality training on acquisition of 
laparoscopic skills. Surg Endosc . 2002;16:406–411 . 
6. Powers KA , Rehrig ST , Irias N , et al. Simulated laparoscopic operating room crisis: approach to enhance the surgical 
team performance. Surg Endosc . 20 08;22(4):885–90 0 . 
7. Powers K , Rehrig S , Schwaitzberg SD , Callery MP , Jones DB . Seasoned surgeons assessed in a laparoscopic crisis. J 
Gastrointest Surg . 20 09;13:994–10 03 . 
8. Arriaga AF , Gawande AA , Raemer DB , et al. Pilot testing of a model for insurance-driven, large scale multicenter 
simulation training for operating room teams. Ann Surg . 2013;259(3):403–410 . 
9. Troung H , Nuwar RM , Therrien S , et al. Operating room team training using simulation: hope or hype? Am J Surg . 
2021;222(6):1146–1153 . 
10. Qi D , Ryason A , Milef N , et al. Virtual reality operating room with AI guidance: design and validation of ﬁre sce- 
nario. Surg Endosc . 2021;35(2):779–786 . 
11. Truong H , Qi D , Ryason A , et al. Does your team know how to respond safely to an operating room ﬁre? Outcomes 
of a virtual reality, AI-enhanced simulation training. Surg Endosc . 2022;36:3059–3067 . 
12. Jones DB , Sung R , Weinberg C , Korelitz T , Andrews A . Three dimensional modeling may improve surgical education 
and clinical practice. Surg Innovat . 2016;23(2):189–195 . 
13. ©2023 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) “ACGME Program requirements for grad- 
uate medical education in general surgery.” 2023. Available online: https://www.acgme.org/globalassets/pfassets/ 
programrequirements/440_generalsurgery_2023.pdf . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
14. ©2023 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) “ACGME Program requirements for gradu- 
ate medical education in obstetrics and gynecology.” 2023. Available online: https://www.acgme.org/globalassets/ 
pfassets/programrequirements/220_obstetricsandgynecology_2023.pdf . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
15. ©2022 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). “ACGME Program requirements for gradu- 
ate medical education in orthopaedic surgery.”2022. Available online: https://www.acgme.org/globalassets/pfassets/ 
programrequirements/260_orthopaedicsurgery_2022.pdf . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
16. ©2023 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) “ACGME Program requirements for graduate 
medical education in plastic surgery (Integrated and Independent).” 2023. Available online: https://www.acgme.org/ 
globalassets/pfassets/programrequirements/360-362_plasticsurgery_2023.pdf . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
17. ©2023 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). “ACGME program requirements for grad- 
uate medical education in anesthesiology.” 2023. Available online: https://www.acgme.org/globalassets/pfassets/ 
programrequirements/040_anesthesiology_2023.pdf . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
18. Buyske J . The role of simulation in certiﬁcation. Surg Clin N Am . 2010;90(3):619–621 . 
19. “Joint statement by the ACS and SAGES on FLS completion for general surgeons who perform laparoscopy.”
2012. Available online: https://www.facs.org/about-acs/statements/joint-statement-by-the-acs-and-sages-on-ﬂs- 
completion- for- general- surgeons- who- perform- laparoscopy/ . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
50 
20. Ellison EC . Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on surgical training and learner well-being: report of a survey of 
general surgery and other surgical specialty educators. J Am Coll Surg . 2020;231(6):613–626 . 
21. Spanknebel K . Surgery clerkship directors’ perceptions of the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on medical student ed- 
ucation. J Am Coll Surg . 2024;238(5):942–959 . 
22. Quaranto BR , Lamb M , Traversone J , et al. Development of an interactive remote basic surgical skills mini-curricu- 
lum for medical students during the COVID-19 pandemic. Surg Innov . 2021;28(2):220–225 . 
23. Tellez J , Abdelfattah K , Farr D . In-person versus virtual suturing and knot-tying curricula: skills training during the 
COVID-19 era. Surgery . 2021;170:165–1669 . 
24. Chan JCY , Waddell TK , Yasufuku K , Keshavjee S , Donahoe LL . Maintaining technical proﬁciency in senior surgical 
fellows during the COVID-19 pandemic through virtual teaching. JTCVS Open . 2021;8:679–687 . 
25. Greenberg JA , Schwarz E , Paige J , Dort J , Bachman S . At-home hands-on surgical training during COVID19: proof of 
concept using a virtual telementoring platform. Surg Endosc . 2021;35(5):1963–1969 . 
26. Ellison EC . One-year follow-up of COVID-19 impact on surgical education: clinical training restored but surgical 
trainee emotional well-being still at risk. J Am Coll Surg . 2022;235(2):195–209 . 
27. Orgill BD , Hao D , Day CJM , Kardong-Edgren S , Minehart RD . Was COVID-19 a heyday for education? Lessons learned 
from a COVID-19 “pop-up” simulation developed overnight. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent) . 2023;37(1):177–179 . 
28. Gomez ED , Ceremsak JJ , Leibowitz A , Jalisi S . A novel cough simulation device for education of risk mitigation 
techniques during aerosol-generating medical procedures. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2021;165(6):816–818 . 
29. Kravitz MB . The comparative effectiveness of virtual reality versus e-module on the training of donning and doﬃng 
personal protective equipment: a randomized, simulation-based educational study. Cureus . 2022;14(3):e23655 . 
30. Varas J . Innovations in surgical training: exploring the role of artiﬁcial intelligence and large language models (LLM). 
Rev Col Bras Cir . 2023;50:e20233605 . 
31. Vedula SS . Artiﬁcial intelligence methods and artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled metrics for surgical education: a multi- 
disciplinary consensus. J Am Coll Surg . 2022;234(6):1181–1192 . 
32. American College of Surgeons Standards for Accredited Education Institutes: 2021 Standards; (c) 2021 American 
College of Surgeons, Chicago, IL . 
33. “Society for Simulation in Healthcare Council for Accreditation of Healthcare Simulation Programs Informational 
Guide for the Accreditation Process.” ©2021 by Society for Simulation in Healthcare. 
34. Brunt LM . FLS: Celebrating a decade of innovation in surgical education. Bull Am Coll Surg . 2014;99(11):10–15 . 
35. Higgins RM , Turbati MS , Goldblatt MI . Preparing for and passing the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery (FLS) 
exam improves general surgery resident operative performance and autonomy. Surg Endosc . 2023;37(8):6438–64 4 4 . 
36. Derevianko AY , Schwaitzberg SD , Tsuda S , et al. Malpractice carrier underwrites Fundamentals of Laparoscopic 
Surgery training and testing: a benchmark for patient safety. Surg Endosc . 2010;24(3):616–623 . 
37. Okrainec A , Henao O , Azzie G . Telesimulation: an effective method for teaching the fundamentals of laparoscopic 
surgery in resource-restricted countries. Surg Endosc . 2010;24(2):417–422 . 
38. Mikrogianakis A , Kam A , Silver S , et al. Telesimulation: an innovative and effective tool for teaching novel in- 
traosseus insertion techniques in developing countries. Acad Emerg Med . 2011;18(4):420–427 . 
39. Henao O , Escallon J , Green J , et al. Fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery in Colombia using telesimulation: an 
effective educational tool for distance learning. Biomedica . 2013;33(1):107–114 . 
40. Burckett-St Laurent DA , Cunningham MS , Abbas S , Chan VW , Okrainec A , Niazi AU . Teaching ultrasound-guided 
regional anesthesia remotely: a feasibility study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand . 2016;60(7):995–1002 . 
41. Choy I , Fecso A , Kwong J , Jackson T , Okrainec A . Remote evaluation of laparoscopic performance using the global 
operative assessment of laparoscopic skills. Surg Endosc . 2013;27(2):378–383 . 
42. Okrainec A , Vassiliou M , Jimenez MC , Henao O , Kaneva P , Ritter EM . Remote FLS testing in the real world: ready 
for “prime time. Surg Endosc . 2016;30(7):2697–2702 . 
43. SAGES. (n.d.). Global Laparoscopic Advancement Program (GLAP): Overview. Society of American Gastrointestinal 
and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES). Retrieved September 30, 2024, from https://www.sages.org/glap-overview/ . 
44. Tsai C, Damoi JO, Zhang LP, et al. Collaborative international partnership: Enabling the development of a state-of- 
the-art minimally invasive surgical center in rural Uganda through telementoring. World J Surg . 2024;48(7):1602–
1608. doi: 10.1002/wjs.12218 . 
45. Vassiliou MC , Dunkin BJ , Marks JM , Fried GM . FLS and FES: Comprehensive Models of Training and Assessment. 
Surg Clin N Am . 2010;90(3):535–558 . 
46. Fuchshuber P . The SAGES Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy program (FUSE): history, development, and purpose. 
Surg Endosc . 2018;32(6):2583–2602 . 
47. Feldman LS , Fuchschuber P , Jones DB , Mischna J , Schwaitzberg SD . Surgeons don’t know what they don’t know 
about the safe use of energy in surgery. Surg Endosc . 2012;26(10):2735–2739 . 
48. Sankaranarayanan G , Baichun L , Miller A , et al. Face validation of the Virtual Electrosurgery Skill Trainer (VEST©). 
Surg Endosc . 2016;30(2):730–738 . 
49. Madani A , Watanabe Y , Townsend N , et al. Structured simulation improves learning of the Fundamental Use of 
Surgical EnergyTM curriculum: a multi-center randomized controlled trial. Surg Endosc . 2016;30(2):684–691 . 
50. Madani A , Watanabe Y , Vassiliou MC , et al. Long-term knowledge retention following simulation-based training for 
electrosurgical safety: 1-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Surg Endosc . 2016;30(3):1156–1163 . 
51. Altieri MS , Carmichael H , Jones E , Robinson T , Prior A , Madani A . Educational value of telementoring for a sim- 
ulation-based fundamental use of surgical energyTM (FUSE) curriculum: a randomized controlled trial in surgical 
trainees. Surg Endosc . 2020;34(8):3650–3655 . 
52. Jones DB , Stefanidis D , Korndorffer JR , Dimick JB , Schultz L , Scott DJ . SAGES University Masters Program: a struc- 
tured curriculum for deliberate, lifelong learning. Surgical Endoscopy . 2017;31(8):3061–3071 . 
53. Acton RD , Jones DB , Liscum KR , Sachdeva AK . ACS and ASE develop Simulation-Based Surgical Skills Curriculum for 
medical students. Bull Am Coll Surg . 2015;100(4):35–39 . 
51 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
54. Glass CC , Acton RD , Blair PG , et al. American College of Surgeons/Association for Surgical Education medical student 
simulation-based surgical skills curriculum needs assessment. Am J Surg . 2014;207(2):165–169 . 
55. Olasky J , Kim M , Muratore S , et al. ACS/ASE Medical Student Simulation-Based Skills Curriculum Study: Implemen- 
tation phase. J Surg Educ . 2019;76(4):962–969 . 
56. Muratore S , Kim M , Olasky J , Campbell A , Acton R . Basic airway skills acquisition using the American College of Sur- 
geons/Association for Surgical Education medical student simulation-based surgical skills curriculum: initial results. 
Am J Surg . 2017;2113(2):233–237 . 
57. Steinemann S , Gardner A , Aulet T , Fitzgibbons S , Campbell A , Acton R . American College of Surgeons/Association for 
Surgical Education medical student simulation-based surgical skills curriculum: alignment with entrustable profes- 
sional activities. Am J Surg . 2019;217(2):198–204 . 
58. Minter RM . Transition to surgical residency: a multi-institutional study of perceived intern preparedness and the ef- 
fect of a formal residency preparatory course in the fourth year of medical school. Acad Med . 2015;90(8):1116–1124 . 
59. “ACS/APDS/ASE resident prep curriculum: goals and objectives” 2014. Available online: https://www.facs.org/media/ 
zodbx3uf/acsapdsasegoalsobjectives.pdf . Accessed June 6, 2024. 
60. Boehler ML , Schwind CJ , Markwell SJ , Minter RM . Mock pages are a valid construct for assessment of clinical deci- 
sion making and interprofessional communication. Ann Surg . 2017;265(1):116–121 . 
61. Stewart MK , Henry RC , Ehrenfeld JM , Terhune KP . Utility of a standardized fourth-year medical student surgical 
preparatory curriculum: program director perceptions. J Surg Educ . 2018;75(3):639–643 . 
62. Danzer E , Dumon K , Klob G , et al. What is the cost associated with the implementation and maintenance of an 
ACS/APDS-based surgical skills curriculum? J Surg Educ . 2011;68(6):519–525 . 
63. Rooney D , Pugh C , Auyang E , Hungness E , Darosa D . Administrative considerations when implementing ACS/APDS 
skills curriculum. Surgery . 2010;147(5):614–621 . 
64. Mackenzie CF , Tisherman SA , Shackelford S , Sevdalis N , Elster E , Bowyer MW . Eﬃcacy of trauma surgery technical 
skills training courses. J Surg Educ . 2019;76(3):832–843 . 
65. Russo RM. The COT at 100: evolution and promulgation of ATLS and surgical skills training. Bull Am Coll Surg . 
2022;107(7):34–42. Available online. https://www.facs.org/for- medical- professionals/news-publications/news-and- 
articles/bulletin/2022/july- 2022- volume- 107- number- 7/the- cot- at- 100- evolution- and- promulgation- of- atls- and- 
surgical- skills- training/ . Accessed June 6, 2024 . 
66. Jacobs LM . Development and evaluation of the advanced trauma operative management course. J Trauma . 
2003;55(3):471–479 . 
67. Jacobs L , Burns K , Luk S , Hull S . Advanced trauma operative management course: participant survey. World J Surg . 
2010;34(1):164–168 . 
68. Perkins RS . Model for team training using the advanced trauma operative management course: pilot study analysis. 
J Surg Educ . 2015;72(6):1200–1208 . 
69. Kuhls DA , Risucci DA , Bowyer MW , Luchette FA . Advanced surgical skills for exposure in trauma: a new surgical 
skills cadaver course for surgery residents and fellows. J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2013;74(2):664–670 . 
70. Bowyer MW , Kuhls DA , Haskin D , et al. Advanced surgical skills for exposure in trauma (ASSET): the ﬁrst 25 courses. 
J Surg Res . 2013;183(2):553–558 . 
71. Mackenzie CFet . Performance of vascular exposure and fasciotomy among surgical residents before and after train- 
ing compared with experts. JAMA Surg . 2017;152(6):581–588 . 
72. Mackenzie CF . Cadaver-based trauma procedural skills training: skills retention 30 months after training among 
practicing surgeons in comparison to experts or recently trained residents. J Am Coll Surg . 2018;227(2):270–279 . 
73. Brenner M , Hoehn M , Pasley J , Dubose J , Stein D , Scalea T . Basic endovascular skills for trauma course: bridging the 
gap between endovascular techniques and the acute care surgeon. J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2014;77(2):286–291 . 
74. Fridling J , Chernock B , Goebel T , et al. Stop the bleed® in medical schools: early advocacy and promising results. 
Am J Disaster Med . 2024;19(2):131–137 . 
75. Schroll R , Smith A , Zeoli T , et al. Eﬃcacy of medical students as stop the bleed participants and instructors. J Surg 
Educ . 2019;76(4):975–981 . 
76. Gupta A , Villegas CV , Rosenberg J , Winchell RJ , Barie PS , Narayan M . Advancing the education of stop the bleed: 
development of a perfused synthetic cadaver model. J Surg Res . 2019;244:516–520 . 
77. Narayan M . Video-based stop the bleed training: a new era in education. J Surg Res . 2022;280:535–542 . 
78. Parvin-Nejad FP , Vegunta G , Mele G , Sifri ZC . Stop the Bleed in the era of virtual learning: a novel strategy for 
remote teaching and evaluation. J Surg Res . 2024;296:759–765 . 
79. Linz MS . Train the trainer in bleeding control: a two-year pilot study in low-income and middle-income countries. 
J Surg Res . 2023;284:17–23 . 
80. Smith LA . World trauma education: hemorrhage control training for healthcare providers in India. Trauma Surg 
Acute Care Open . 2019;4(1):e0 0 0263 . 
81. Maithel SK , Sierra R , Korndorfer J , et al. Construct and face validity comparison of three laparoscopic surgery sim- 
ulation trainers: MIST-VR, Endotower, and CELTS. Surg Endosc . 2006;20(1):104–112 . 
82. Sankaranarayanan G , Lin H , Arikatla VS , et al. Preliminary face and construct validation study of a virtual basic 
laparoscopic skill trainer. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Techniq. 2010;20(2):153–157 . 
83. Zhang L , Sankaranarayanan G , Arikatla VS , et al. Characterizing the learning curve of the VBLAST-PT (Virtual Basic 
Laparoscopic Skills Trainer). Surg Endos . 2013;27(10):3603–3615 . 
84. Arikatla VS , Sankaranarayanan G , Ahn W , et al. Face and construct validation for a virtual peg transfer simulator. 
Surg Endosc . 2013;27(5):1721–1729 . 
85. Chellali A , Schwaitzberg S , Jones DB , De S , Cao CGL , De S . Validation of VBLAST peg transfer task: a ﬁrst step 
towards an alternate training standard. Surg Endosc . 2014;28:2856–2863 . 
86. Chellali A , Ahn W , Sankaranarayanan G , et al. Preliminary evaluation of the pattern cutting and the ligating loop 
virtual laparoscopic trainers. Surg Endosc . 2015;29(4):815–821 . 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
52 
87. Awtrey CS , Chellali A , Schwaitzberg SD , De S , Jones DB , Cao CGL . Validation of the VBLAST: a virtual peg transfer 
task in gynecologic surgeons. GYN. J Minimal Invas Gynecol . 2015;22(7):1271–1277 . 
88. Sankaranarayanan G , Li B , Manser K , et al. Face and construct validation of a next generation virtual reality 
(Gen2-VR) surgical simulator. Surg Endosc . 2016;30:979–985 . 
89. Linsk AM , Monden KR , Sankaranarayan G , et al. Validation of the VBLAST pattern cutting task: a learning curve 
study. Surg Endosc . 2018;32(4):1990–2002 . 
90. Sankaranarayanan G , Adair J , Halic T , et al. Validation of a novel laparoscopic adjustable gastric band simulator. 
Surg Endosc . 2011;25(4):1012–1018 . 
91. Demirel D , Butler KL , Halic T , et al. A hierarchical task analysis of cricothyroidotomy procedure for a virtual airway 
skills trainer simulator. Am J Surg . 2016;212(3):475–484 . 
92. Qi D , Petrusa E , Kruger U , et al. Surgeon with ﬁve or more actual cricothyrotomies perform signiﬁcantly better on 
VR simulator. J Surg Res . 2020;252:247–254 . 
93. Ryason A , Petrusa ER , Kruger U , et al. Development of an endotracheal intubation formative assessment tool. J Edu 
Perioperat Med . 2020;22(1):635 . 
94. Dombek M , Courant R , Lungarini A , et al. FUSE certiﬁcation enhances performance on an immersive virtual reality 
simulator for dispersive electrode placement. Surg Endosc . 2018;32(8):3640–3645 . 
95. Dorozhkin D , Olasky J , Jones DB , et al. OR ﬁre virtual training simulator: design and face validity. Surg Endosc . 
2017;31(9):3527–3533 . 
96. Sankaranarayanan G , Wooley L , Hogg D , et al. Immersive virtual reality-based training improves response in a sim- 
ulated operating room ﬁre scenario. Surg Endosc . 2018;32:3439–3449 . 
97. Nakamoto K , Jones DB , Adra S . Gamiﬁcation of robotic simulation to train general surgery residents. Surg Endosc . 
2023;37(4):3136–3144 . 
98. Maithel SK , Villegas L , Stylopoulos N , Dawson S , Jones DB . Simulated laparoscopy using a head-mounted display vs 
traditional video monitor: an assessment of performance and muscle fatigue. Surg Endosc . 2005;19(3):406–411 . 
99. Meara JG, Leather AJ, Hagander L, et al. Global Surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, wel- 
fare, and economic development. Lancet (London, England) . 2015;386(9993):569–624. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15) 
60160-X . 
100. Kewalramani D, Loftus TJ, Mayol J, Narayan M. Artiﬁcial intelligence in surgery: a global balancing act. Br J Surg . 
2024;111(3):znae062. doi: 10.1093/bjs/znae062 . 
101. Kewalramani D, Loftus TJ, Coleman JR, Kaafarani H, Narayan M. Using AI to bridge global surgical gaps: high tech, 
high impact. Lancet . 2024;403(10438):1746–1747. doi: 10.1016/S0140- 6736(23)02753- 8 . 
102. Wallace MB , et al. Impact of artiﬁcial intelligence on miss rate of colorectal neoplasia. Gastroenterology . 
2022;163:295–304.e5 . 
103. Varghese C, Harrison EM, O’Grady G, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence in surgery. Nat Med . 2024;30:1257–1268. doi: 10. 
1038/s41591- 024- 02970- 3 . 
104. Byerly S, Maurer LR, Mantero A, Naar L, An G, Kaafarani HMA. Machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence for sur- 
gical decision making. Surg Infect . 2021;22(6):626–634. doi: 10.1089/sur.2021.007 . 
105. El Hechi M , Ward TM , An GC , et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, and surgical science: reality versus 
hype. J Surg Res, . 2021;264:A1–A9 . 
106. Stonko DP , Morrison JJ , Hicks CW . A review of mature machine learning- and artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled appli- 
cations in aortic surgery. JVS-Vasc Insight . 2023;1:10 0 016 . 
107. Monti S , Tamayo P , Mesirov J , Golub T . Consensus clustering: a resampling-based method for class discovery and 
visualization of gene expression microarray data. Mach Learn . 2003;52:91–118 . 
108. Bertsimas D , Dunn J , Velmahos GC , Kaafarani HMA . Surgical risk is not linear: derivation and validation of a novel, 
user-friendly, and machine-learning-based predictive optimal trees in emergency surgery risk (POTTER) calculator. 
Ann Surg . 2018;268:574–583 . 
109. Hashimoto DA , Rosman G , Rus D , Meireles OR . Artiﬁcial intelligence in surgery: promises and perils. Ann Surg . 
2018;268(1):70–76 . 
110. Ward TM , Mascagni P , Ban Y , et al. Computer vision in surgery. Surgery . 2021;169(5):1253–1256 . 
111. Ward TM , Mascagni P , Madani A , Padoy N , Perretta S , Hashimoto DA . Surgical data science and artiﬁcial intelligence 
for surgical education. J Surg Oncol . 2021;124:221–230 . 
112. Mirchi N , Bissonnette V , Yilmaz R , Ledwos N , Winkler-Schwartz A , Del Maestro RF . The virtual operative assis- 
tant: an explainable artiﬁcial intelligence tool for simulation-based training in surgery and medicine. PLoS ONE . 
2020;15(2):e0229596 . 
113. Mascagni P, Vardazaryan A, Alapatt D, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence for surgical safety: automatic assessment of the 
critical view of safety in laparoscopic cholecystectomy using deep learning. Ann Surg . 2022;275(5):955–961. doi: 10. 
1097/SLA.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 04351 . 
114. Twinanda AP , Shehata S , Mutter D , Marescaux J , de Mathelin M , Padoy N . EndoNet: a deep architecture for recog- 
nition tasks on laparoscopic videos. IEEE Trans Med Imaging . 2017;36:86–97 . 
115. Ward TM, Hashimoto DA, Ban Y, et al. Automated operative phase identiﬁcation in peroral endoscopic myotomy. 
Surg Endosc . 2021;35(7):4008–4015. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0464- 020- 07833- 9 . 
116. Esteva, H., Núñez, T.G. and Rodríguez, R.O., Neural networks and artiﬁcial intelligence in thoracic surgery. 
117. Lu J , Xue Z , Xu B-B , et al. Application of an artiﬁcial neural network for predicting the potential chemotherapy 
beneﬁt of patients with gastric cancer after radical surgery. Surgery . 2022;171(4):955–965 . 
118. Vukicevic AM , Stojadinovic M , Radovic M , et al. Automated development of artiﬁcial neural networks for clinical 
purposes: application for predicting the outcome of choledocholithiasis surgery. Comput Biol Med . 2016;75:80–89 . 
119. Puttagunta M, Ravi S. Medical image analysis based on deep learning approach. Multimed Tools Appl . 
2021;80(16):24365–24398. doi: 10.1007/s11042- 021- 10707-4 . 
120. Groot OQ , Ogink PT , Oosterhoff JH , Beam AL . Natural language processing and its role in spine surgery: a narrative 
review of potentials and challenges. Sem Spine Surg . 2021;33(2):100877 . 
53 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
121. Bur AM , Shew M , New J . Artiﬁcial intelligence for the otolaryngologist: a state of the art review. Otolaryngology . 
2019;160:603–611 . 
122. Khor WS, Baker B, Amin K, Chan A, Patel K, Wong J. Augmented and virtual reality in surgery-the digital surgical 
environment: applications, limitations and legal pitfalls. Ann Transl Med . 2016;4(23):454. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.12. 
23 . 
123. Eckhoff JA, Rosman G, Altieri MS, et al. SAGES consensus recommendations on surgical video data use, structure, 
and exploration (for research in artiﬁcial intelligence, clinical quality improvement, and surgical education). Surg 
Endosc . 2023;37(11):8690–8707. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0464- 023- 10288- 3 . 
124. Schroeder D, Kowalewski T, White L, et al. Exploratory visualization of surgical training databases for improving 
skill acquisition. IEEE Comput Graph Appl . 2012;32(6):71–81. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2012.67 . 
125. Baghdadi A, Lama S, Singh R, et al. A data-driven performance dashboard for surgical dissection. Sci Rep . 
2021;11:15013. doi: 10.1038/s41598- 021- 94487- 9 . 
126. Reddy S, Allan S, Coghlan S, Cooper P. A governance model for the application of AI in health care. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc . 2020;27(3):4 91–4 97. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz192 . 
127. Foster V, Young A, Modi N, et al.Medicines for Neonates Investigator Group The use of routinely collected 
patient data for research: a critical review. Health (London, England: 1997) . 2012;16(4):448–463. doi: 10.1177/ 
1363459311425513 . 
128. Scott DJ , Rege RV , Bergen PC , et al. Measuring operative performance after laparoscopic skills training: edited video- 
tape versus direct observation. J Laparoendosc Sur Tech . 20 0 0;10(4):183–190 . 
129. Theator, 2024. Choose the product that captures all your surgical video. Available at: < https://theator.io/blog/ 
choose- the- product- that- captures- all- your- surgical- video >[Accessed June 7, 2024]. 
130. Laplante S, Namazi B, Kiani P, et al. Validation of an artiﬁcial intelligence platform for the guidance of safe laparo- 
scopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc . 2023;37(3):2260–2268. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0464- 022- 09439- 9 . 
131. Facebook, 2024. Facebook group for medical professionals. Available at: < https://www.facebook.com/groups/ 
1522777931338325/ >[Accessed June 7, 2024]. 
132. Pryor AD, Lendvay T, Jones A, Ibáñez B, Pugh C. An American Board of Surgery Pilot of video assessment of surgeon 
technical performance in surgery. Ann Surg . 2023;277(4):591–595. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 05804 . 
133. Tene T, Vique López DF, Valverde Aguirre PE, Orna Puente LM, Vacacela Gomez C. Virtual reality and augmented re- 
ality in medical education: an umbrella review. Front Digi Health . 2024;6:1365345. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2024.1365345 . 
134. Alaker M, Wynn GR, Arulampalam T. Virtual reality training in laparoscopic surgery: a systematic review & meta- 
analysis. Int J Surg . 2016;29:85–94. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2016.03.034 . 
135. Brollo PP, Bresadola V. Enhancing visualization and guidance in general surgery: a comprehensive and narrative 
review of the current cutting-edge technologies and future perspectives. J Gastrointest Surg . 2024;28(2):179–185. 
doi: 10.1016/j.gassur.2023.12.009 . 
136. Winkler-Schwartz A, Bissonnette V, Mirchi N, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence in medical education: best practices us- 
ing machine learning to assess surgical expertise in virtual reality simulation. J Surg Educ . 2019;76(6):1681–1690. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jsurg.2019.05.015 . 
137. Azer SA, Guerrero APS. The challenges imposed by artiﬁcial intelligence: are we ready in medical education? BMC 
Med Educ . 2023;23(1):680. doi: 10.1186/s12909- 023- 04660- z . 
138. Reid, E., 2024. The Hotchkiss alum of the month. Hotchkiss Alumni Magaz. 
139. Møller KE, Sørensen JL, Topperzer MK, et al. Implementation of an innovative technology called the OR black box: 
a feasibility study. Surg Innovat . 2023;30(1):64–72. doi: 10.1177/15533506221106258 . 
140. Seo S, Kennedy-Metz LR, Zenati MA, Shah JA, Dias RD, Unhelkar VV. Towards an AI coach to infer team mental 
model alignment in healthcare. IEEE Conference on Cognitive and Computational Aspects of Situation Management 
(CogSIMA) ; 2021:39–44. doi: 10.1109/cogsima51574.2021.9475925 . 
141. Agha RA , Fowler AJ , Sevdalis N . The role of non-technical skills in surgery. Ann Med Surg . 2015;4:422–427 . 
142. Lamb A, McKinney B, Frousiakis P, Diaz G, Sweet S. A comparative study of traditional technique guide versus 
virtual reality in orthopedic trauma training. Adv Med Educat Pract . 2023;14:947–955. doi: 10.2147/AMEP.S395087 . 
143. Laufer S, Pugh CM, Van Veen BD. Characterizing touch using pressure data and auto regressive models. Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society. Annual International Conference, 2014 ; 2014:1839–1842. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.6943967 . 
144. Mohamadipanah H, Wise B, Witt A, et al. Performance assessment using sensor technology. J Surg Oncol . 
2021;124(2):200–215. doi: 10.1002/jso.26519 . 
145. Pugh CM, Ghazi A, Stefanidis D, Schwaitzberg SD, Martino MA, Levy JS. How wearable technology can facilitate AI 
analysis of surgical videos. Ann Surg Open . 2020;1(2):e011. doi: 10.1097/AS9.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 011 . 
146. Huang FC, Pugh CM, Patton JL, Mussa-Ivaldi FA. Learning kinematic mappings in laparoscopic surgery. Annual Inter- 
national Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society. Annual International Conference, 2010 ; 2010:2097–2102. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5626188 . 
147. Fazlollahi AM, Yilmaz R, Winkler-Schwartz A, et al. AI in Surgical curriculum design and unintended out- 
comes for technical competencies in simulation Training. JAMA Network Open . 2023;6(9):e2334658. doi: 10.1001/ 
jamanetworkopen.2023.34658 . 
148. Mirchi N, Ledwos N, Del Maestro RF. Intelligent tutoring systems: re-envisioning surgical education in response to 
COVID-19. Can J Neurol Sci . 2021;48(2):198–200. doi: 10.1017/cjn.2020.202 . 
149. Chen J, Cheng N, Cacciamani G, et al. Objective assessment of robotic surgical technical skill: a systematic review. J 
Urol . 2019;201(3):461–469. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2018.06.078 . 
150. Hung AJ, Rambhatla S, Sanford DI, et al. Road to automating robotic suturing skills assessment: battling mislabeling 
of the ground truth. Surgery . 2022;171(4):915–919. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2021.08.014 . 
151. Sanford DI, Ma R, GhoreiﬁA, Haque TF, Nguyen JH, Hung AJ. Association of suturing technical skill assessment 
scores between virtual reality simulation and live surgery. J Endourol . 2022;36(10):1388–1394. doi: 10.1089/end. 
2022.0158 . 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625
54 
152. Keller DS, Grossman RC, Winter DC. Choosing the new normal for surgical education using alternative platforms. 
Surgery (Oxford, Oxfordshire) . 2020;38(10):617–622. doi: 10.1016/j.mpsur.2020.07.017 . 
153. Loftus TJ , et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence and surgical decision-making. JAMA Surg . 2020;155:148–158 . 
154. Goodman, ED, Patel, KK, Zhang, Y, Locke, W, Kennedy, CJ, Mehrotra, R, et al. (2021). A real-time spatiotemporal AI 
model analyzes skill in open surgical videos. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2112.07219v1 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/ 
abs/2112.07219v1 . 
155. Zia A , Hung A , Essa I , Jarc A . Surgical activity recognition in robot-assisted radical prostatectomy using deep learn- 
ing. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention—MICCAI 2018 . Springer International Publishing; 
2018:273–280 . 
156. Luongo F , Hakim R , Nguyen JH , Anandkumar A , Hung AJ . Deep learning-based computer vision to recognize and 
classify suturing gestures in robot-assisted surgery. Surgery . 2021;169:1240–1244 . 
157. NJIT News, 2024. AI-powered surgical training program provides real-time feedback and instruction. Available 
at: 
< https://news.njit.edu/ai-powered- surgical- training- program- provides- real- time- feedback- and- instruction > 
[Accessed June 7, 2024]. 
158. Hashimoto DA, Rosman G, Witkowski ER, et al. Computer vision analysis of intraoperative video: automated 
recognition of operative steps in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. Ann Surg . 2019;270(3):414–421. doi: 10.1097/SLA. 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 03460 . 
159. Tokuyasu T, Iwashita Y, Matsunobu Y, et al. Development of an artiﬁcial intelligence system using deep learning 
to indicate anatomical landmarks during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc . 2021;35(4):1651–1658. doi: 10. 
10 07/s0 0464- 020- 07548- x . 
160. Mascagni P, Vardazaryan A, Alapatt D, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence for surgical safety: automatic assessment of the 
critical view of safety in laparoscopic cholecystectomy using deep learning. Ann Surg . 2022;275(5):955–961. doi: 10. 
1097/SLA.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 04351 . 
161. Shimizu T, Hachiuma R, Kajita H, Takatsume Y, Saito H. Hand motion-aware surgical tool localization and classiﬁca- 
tion from an egocentric camera. J Imag . 2021;7(2):15. doi: 10.3390/jimaging7020015 . 
162. Ran B, Huang B, Liang S, Hou Y. Surgical instrument detection algorithm based on improved YOLOv7x. Sensors 
(Basel, Switzerland) . 2023;23(11):5037. doi: 10.3390/s23115037 . 
163. Bamba Y, Ogawa S, Itabashi M, et al. Object and anatomical feature recognition in surgical video images based on 
a convolutional neural network. Int J CARS . 2021;16:2045–2054. doi: 10.1007/s11548- 021- 02434- w . 
164. Madani A, Namazi B, Altieri MS, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence for intraoperative guidance: using semantic seg- 
mentation to identify surgical anatomy during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Ann Surg . 2022;276(2):363–369. 
doi: 10.1097/SLA.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 04594 . 
165. Pedrett R, Mascagni P, Beldi G, et al. Technical skill assessment in minimally invasive surgery using artiﬁcial intel- 
ligence: a systematic review. Surg Endosc . 2023;37:7412–7424. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0464- 023- 10335-z . 
166. Csats. (2024). A Post-operative Surgical Insights Platform. Available at: < https://www.csats.com > [Accessed 7 June 
2024]. 
167. Surgical autonomy, 2024. Available at: < https://info.surgicalautonomy.org >[Accessed June 7, 2024]. 
168. Ethicon, 2020. Ethicon debuts an AI-powered laparoscopic skills training platform at the American Association 
of Gynecological Laparoscopists Global Congress. Available at: < https://www.jnj.com/media- center/press- releases/ 
ethicon- debuts- an- ai- powered- laparoscopic- skills- training- platform- at- the- american- association- of- 
gynecological- laparoscopists- global- congress >[Accessed June 7, 2024] 
169. Surgical AI Trainer Prototypes for Humanity, 2020. Available at: < https://www.prototypesforhumanity.com/project/ 
surgical- ai- trainer/ >[Accessed June 7, 2024]. 
170. Kiyasseh D, Laca J, Haque TF, et al. Human visual explanations mitigate bias in AI-based assessment of surgeon 
skills. NPJ Digi Med . 2023;6(1):54. doi: 10.1038/s41746- 023- 00766- 2 . 
171. Kiyasseh D, Ma R, Haque TF, et al. A vision transformer for decoding surgeon activity from surgical videos. Nat 
Biomed Engineer . 2023;7:780–796. doi: 10.1038/s41551- 023- 01010-8 . 
172. Kiyasseh D, Laca J, Haque TF, et al. A multi-institutional study using artiﬁcial intelligence to provide reliable and 
fair feedback to surgeons. Commun Med . 2023;3(1):42. doi: 10.1038/s43856- 023- 00263- 3 . 
173. Ali S, Crawford R, Pandey AK. Arthroscopic scene segmentation using multispectral reconstructed frames and deep 
learning. Intell Med . 2023;3(4):243–251. doi: 10.1016/j.imed.2022.10.006 . 
174. Wang F, Sun X, Li J. Surgical smoke removal via residual Swin transformer network. I nt J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 
2023;18(8):1417–1427. doi: 10.1007/s11548- 023- 02835- z . 
175. Kumazu Y, Kobayashi N, Kitamura N, et al. Automated segmentation by deep learning of loose connective tis- 
sue ﬁbers to deﬁne safe dissection planes in robot-assisted gastrectomy. Sci Rep . 2021;11:21198. doi: 10.1038/ 
s41598- 021- 00557- 3 . 
176. Marsden M, Weyers BW, Bec J, et al. Intraoperative margin assessment in oral and oropharyngeal cancer using label- 
free ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging and machine learning. IEEE Transact Biomed Eng . 2021;6 8(3):857–86 8. doi: 10. 
1109/TBME.2020.3010480 . 
177. Bockelmann N, Schetelig D, Kesslau D, Buschschlüter S, Ernst F, Bonsanto MM. Toward intraoperative tissue classi- 
ﬁcation: exploiting signal feedback from an ultrasonic aspirator for brain tissue differentiation. Int J Comput Assist 
Radiol Surg . 2022;17(9):1591–1599. doi: 10.1007/s11548- 022- 02713- 0 . 
178. von Bechtolsheim F, Bielert F, Schmidt S, et al. Can you feel the force just right? Tactile force feedback for train- 
ing of minimally invasive surgery-evaluation of vibration feedback for adequate force application. Surg Endosc . 
2024;38(7):3917–3928. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0464- 024- 10919- 3 . 
179. De Backer P, Peraire Lores M, Demuynck M, et al. Surgical phase duration in robot-assisted partial nephrec- 
tomy: a surgical data science exploration for clinical relevance. Diagnostics . 2023;13(21):3386. doi: 10.3390/ 
diagnostics13213386 . 
180. Eslamian S, Reisner LA, Pandya AK. Development and evaluation of an autonomous camera control algorithm on 
the da Vinci Surgical System. Int J Med Robot + Comput Assist Surg . 2020;16(2):e2036. doi: 10.1002/rcs.2036 . 
55 
E.W. Riddle, D. Kewalramani, M. Narayan, and D.B. Jones / Current Problems in Surgery 61 (2024) 101625 
181. Knudsen JE, Ghaffar U, Ma R, Hung AJ. Clinical applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in robotic surgery. J Robot Surg . 
2024;18(1):102. doi: 10.1007/s11701- 024- 01867- 0 . 
182. Fard MJ, Ameri S, Darin Ellis R, Chinnam RB, Pandya AK, Klein MD. Automated robot-assisted surgical skill evalua- 
tion: predictive analytics approach. Int J Med Robot + Comput Assist Surg . 2018;14(1):e1850. doi: 10.1002/rcs.1850 . 
183. Lavanchy JL, Zindel J, Kirtac K, et al. Automation of surgical skill assessment using a three-stage machine learning 
algorithm. Sci Rep . 2021;11(1):5197. doi: 10.1038/s41598- 021- 84295- 6 . 
184. Parham G, Bing EG, Cuevas A, et al. Creating a low-cost virtual reality surgical simulation to increase surgical on- 
cology capacity and capability. Ecancermedicalscience . 2019;13:910. doi: 10.3332/ecancer.2019.910 . 
185. Ortiz C, Vela J, Contreras C, et al. A new approach for the acquisition of trauma surgical skills: an OSCE type of 
simulation training program. Surg Endosc . 2022;36(11):8441–8450. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0464- 022- 09098- w . 
186. McClelland TJ, Ford K, Dagash H, Lander A, Lakhoo K. Low-ﬁdelity paediatric surgical simulation: description of 
models in low-resource settings. World J Surg . 2019;43(5):1193–1197. doi: 10.10 07/s0 0268- 019- 04921- 3 . 
187. Hung AJ, Chen J, Shah A, Gill IS. Telementoring and telesurgery for minimally invasive procedures. J Urol . 
2018;199(2):355–369. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2017.06.082 . 
188. Madani A, Hirpara D, Chadi SA, Dhar P, Okrainec A. Leveraging videoconferencing technology to augment surgical 
training during a pandemic. Ann Surg Open . 2021;2(2):e035. doi: 10.1097/AS9.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 035 . 
189. Praharaj SK, Ameen S. The relevance of telemedicine in continuing medical education. Indian J Psychol Med . 
2020;42(5 Suppl):97S–102S. doi: 10.1177/0253717620957524 . 
190. American College of Surgeons, 2024. ACS releases statement primer on telehealth in surgical prac- 
tice. Available at: < https://www.facs.org/for- medical- professionals/news-publications/news- and- articles/acs- brief/ 
march- 19- 2024- issue/acs- releases- statement- primer- on- telehealth- in- surgical- practice/ >[Accessed June 7, 2024]. 
191. Bogen EM, Augestad KM, Patel HR, Lindsetmo RO. Telementoring in education of laparoscopic surgeons: an emerg- 
ing technology. World J Gastrointest Endosc . 2014;6(5):148–155. doi: 10.4253/wjge.v6.i5.148 . 
192. Goodman LF, St-Louis E, Yousef Y, et al. The global initiative for children’s surgery: optimal resources for improving 
care. Eur J Pediatr Surg . 2018;28(1):51–59. doi: 10.1055/s- 0037- 1604399 . 
193. Nonet GAH, Gössling T, Van Tulder R, et al. Multi-stakeholder engagement for the sustainable development goals: 
introduction to the special issue. J Bus Ethics . 2022;180:945–957. doi: 10.1007/s10551- 022- 05192- 0 . 
